---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# CPC

Civil Nature : determination of civil rights. e.g titles, money suits, matrimonial suits, office. Suits of religious honors, dignities or privileges are not suits of civil nature.

  

**Types of jurisdictions:**

1. Territorial : geographical boundaries
2. Pecuniary : amount or value of the case that can be presented
3. Subject Matter

  

**Rules**

1. Every suit in the Court of lowest grade.
2. No court shall entertain a suit unless it has competence to take cognizance of the same.

  

**Place**

1. Immovable Property - where situated, any place if situated in different place.
2. In other cases - defendant actually resides, carries business, cause of action arises

  

**Parties**

1. Plaintiff - one who seeks relief
2. Defendant - against whom suit is filed.

  

**Types of parties**

1. Necessary - no meaningful decision can be arrived in absence. The suit will be rejected on account of being non-joinder
2. Misjoinder - an unncessary party is joined in the suit. The suit does not suffer from misjoinder.

  

**Pleadings**

1. Statements in writing. Filed by each party. All details. **NOT** evidence.
2. Includes Plaint (detailed application by plaintiff in Court) and Written (defendents detailed reply to the plaint)
3. Replication - further pleadings by plaintiff
4. Rejoinder - reply of Defendant to the further pleadings.

**Content of Plaints**

1. Name of Court
2. Particulars of Plaintiff & Defendent
3. Cause of action
4. Relief claimed
5. Signature of Party
6. Verification
7. Affidavit

  

**Written Statement**

1. To be filed within 30 / 90 days
2. Documents relied upon in defence
3. Specific denials
4. Failure to deny specifically causes presumption of admission

  

**Summons**

- The name of court, purpose for which presence is required, date and time of appearance, signature of judge, seal of the court.
- It must be accompanied by copy of plaint
- Service of summon

    - Direct personal service
    - Authorized agent
    - To an adult

        - defendent absent
        - no likelihood of found at his residence
    - Fixing - when family refuses to accept. Fix copy on front door.
    - Registered post, courier service, fax and e-mail approved by court.
    - Substituted Service : where court is satisfied that there is reason to believe that defendent is keeping out of the way to avoid service.

        - affixing copy in Court
        - conspicuous part of the house where the defendent is known to have last resided.
        - publication in the newspaper.
        - beating of drums

**Hearing**

- First hearing issues are framed.
- Hearing when evidence is taken of parties and their witness
- Issues are of 2 kinds - facts & law.

  

**Withdrawal**

- Absolute Withdrawal (w/o courts permission) - courts can't refuse it. Can't bring a fresh suit now.
- Qualified Withdrawal (leave of court) - where suit likely to fail

  

**Compromise**

- Settle the dispute and apply for a Decree.
- Duty of the court to pass the decree in accordance with the compromise.
- Compromise has to be lawful.
- Must be in writing and signed by parties

  

**Abatement**

- Suit becomes redundant due to a person ceasing to exist.
- No abatement if right to sue survives and death after hearing has taken place.
- Substitution of legal representative within 90 days.
- Fresh suit on same cause of action barred.

  

**Interlocutary Orders**

- Reasoned order on party's petition during pendency to provide interim relief.

    - sale of movable property subject to natural decay
    - detention, preservation of matter.

  

**Injunctions**

- It is a judicial remedy prohibiting persons from doing a specified act or commanding them to undo some wrong.

    - Mandatory - directing a party do some act
    - Prohibitive / Preventive - restraining a party from doing an act (most common)
    - Temporary & Permanent - permanent only by a decree made, governed by SRA. Temporary governed by CPC. This is on the condition that plaintiff has a prima facie case, the plaintiff will suffer irreparable loss which cannot be compensated in money terms.

**Receiver**

- Impartial person appointed by the court to manage property under litigation
- Appointment can be made at any stage of the suit - before or after a decree.
- Discretionary power of the court.
- Cannot exercise this power suo-moto

  

**Right to Lodge Caveat**

- To take care.
- Intimation to the proper office or court, to prevent the taking of any step without intimation to the party
- Notice of caveat through registered post.
- Will remain in force for 90 days.

  

**Judgment**

- Statement given by the judge on grounds of decree or order.
- Immediately after completion of hearing or on some future date. Ordinarily within 30 days (not beyond 60 in extraordinary)

  

**Decree**

- Formal expression of adjudication which conclusively determines the right of the parties regarding all or any of the matters in controversy.
- For example, dismissal in case of non-appearance, order to withdraw suit, interlocutary orders, refusing stay are not decrees.
- Execution of decree is the enforcement of the decrees or orders by the process of the court to enable the decree holder to realize the fruits of the judgement.
- Execution is of 2 types: against person and against property.