---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Untitled Note

[http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=55769#.WEuFmvl97IU](http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=55769#.WEuFmvl97IU)

World's most translated document. 

  

10 December 1948.

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. 

  

Dr. Hansa Jivraj Mehta. She was responsible for changing the text from All men are born equal to All Human beings are born equal. India was one of 48 countries.

  

The only thing universal about human rights is their universal violation.

  

The true test of “good governance” is the degree to which it delivers on the promise of civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights. Thus, the key benchmark for judging effective governance is whether or not public institutions are effectively guaranteeing rights such as right to health, housing, food, education, and justice, besides ensuring effective safety in the country.

  

NHRC receives 8000 complaints every year. 

  

Mindset of superiority and privilege. 

  

Stand up for someone's right today, tomorrow and every day.

  

“Where, after all, do universal human rights begin? In small places, close to home – so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world. Unless these rights have meaning there, they have little meaning anywhere. Without concerted citizen action to uphold them close to home, we shall look in vain for progress in the larger world.”

  

 When a vulnerable person is bullied, we can step in. Wherever there is discrimination and exploitation, we can speak up and let it be known that we oppose this, and seek to stop it. We can join others to publicly lobby for better leadership, better laws and greater respect for human dignity

  

Wherever we are, we can make a real difference. In the street, in school, at work, in public transport; in the voting booth, on social media. The time for this is now. ‘We the peoples’ can take a stand for rights. And together, we can take a stand for more humanity. It starts with each of us. Step forward and defend the rights of a refugee or migrant, a person with disabilities, an LGBT person, a woman, a child, indigenous peoples, a minority group, or anyone else at risk of discrimination or violence

  

Banning of Sati and Widow Remarriage.

  

India Ranks 130th in Human Development Index

  

Poverty is the worst form of Human Violence. 

  

1 billion people undernourished

90 seconds woman dies from complication of pregnancy

1 billion people live in slums

  

Our efforts for the development of our country will have to be premised on the objective of securing human dignity and guaranteeing fundamental human rights to all. No police station, commission, or court can monitor every nook and corner of the country to prevent human rights abuses. It is ultimately up to the citizens of this country to treat each other as equals. Each one of us needs to inculcate a human rights culture in his/her neighbourhood. We also need to remember our duties as enshrined in Article 51A of the Constitution

  

The woods are lovely dark and deep. But I have promises to keep, miles to go before I sleep, miles to go before I sleep.

  

Digital Technology

Climate change

Conflict over resources

Refugee crisis

Povery and Unemployment