---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Law of Torts

**What is tort?**

A civil wrong other than a mere breach of contract or a breach of trust. 

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Tort | Crime |
| Private wrong, breach of private duties | Public wrong, breach of public duties |
| Object of action is compensation | Object is to punish the wrong doer |
| Individual has to approach a Civil Court | State initiates prosecution |

  

Same act can correspond to both tort and crime. E.g a man falling in a ditch on road.

  

Consumer Protection Act brought specifically for Tort purpose.

  

In action for compensation of torts, plea of stranger to contract is irrelevant. The rule of **absolute liability** was applied. 

  

Both tort and contract are legally enforceable. Contract involves a consent e.g purchase of car. Tort is punitive in spirit.

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Tort | Contract |
| Duty imposed by law | Duty imposed by parties to contract |
| Violation of rights in rem | In personam |
| Intention is taken into consideration | Intention irrelevant |
| Damages are unliquidated | Liquidated |

  

**Essentials?**

    - Wrongful act, act must be recognized by law, it should result in injuria.
    - _Injuria sine damno:_ Infringement of legal right without damage, loss or harm
    - _Damnum sine injuria:_ Damage without infringement of legal right.

In crime mens-rea is necessary, in tort a man is presumed to intend natural or probable consequence of act.

  

**Vicarious Liability?**

- Liability for wrong committed by others.
- Principle: he who does an act through another, does it himself.
- Principle - agent, master - servant, partners.

**Kinds of Torts?**

- Affecting person: Assault, battery or false imprisonment.
- Affecting reputation:

    - defamation. Libel (addressed to eye and actionable per se), Slander (addressed to the ear and actionable on proof of damage).
    - malicious prosecution
- Affecting immovable property

    - trespass
    - dispossession
    - inury to easements.
- Affecting movable property

    - trespass of goods
    - detention and conversion
- Both person and property

    - negligence, nuisance, fraud

**Defences?**

- _Volenti non-fit injuria (to a willing person, injury is not done)_
- Plaintiff wrongdoer, inevitable, act of god, private defence, mistake (mistake of fact is not a defence), necessity, statutory authority

**Remedies?**

- Damages: Pecuniary compensation
- Specific restitution of property
- Injunction
- Extra Judicial

    - Self help (re-entering the land, ejecting the trespasser)
    - Abatement of nuisance
    - Distress damage feasant (withholding the thing that caused the damage, till the owner compensates for the loss).

  

**Absolute Liability vs Strict Liability**

In a crime of absolute liability a person could be guilty even if there was no intention to commit the crime. Defence on the grounds of _mistake of fact_ is not a defence. Negligence is not required to be proven. e.g owning a pet rattle snake.

  

It's a standard of tort liability. M.C.Mehta vs Union of India case (Oleum Gas Leak Tragedy).