# Revolution and Nationalism

AMERICAN REVOLUTION

  

Queen Elizabeth declaration led to settlement of 13 colonies. Virginia was the first colony (1607)

  

**Reasons ?**

Economic

1. America was completely under the control of England which led to economic exploitation of Americans which hampered growth and development.
2. Navigation Law of 1651 - Compulsory for American ships to attend British ports before leaving for other ports of the world.
3. Exim Policy - Britain had a trading monopoly in crucial products of America like Potato, Tobacco, Cotton etc
4. Industrial Policy - Americans were not allowed to establish big production units.

Social

1. It became land of opportunity. Creation of new social structure which was different from Europe. It became melting pot of all sorts of people, ideas, religion and tradition. This led to a liberal attitude in society.
2. People were detached from their mother land. The large part of the population consisted of rebels, refugees, convicts who were in search for the future. Large scale migration took place. e.g Pilgrim Fathers - Protestant groups which had escaped to save itself from operation of catholic saints
3. Dynamism of society - Turned barren land into area of plantations and production which forced Europe to rely on American goods and products.
4. Dissatisfaction - Fruits of American labour were snatched away by Britain.

Intellectual Class

Intellectual class provides for reason for crisis and solution for it.

1. Thomas Paine: He published a journal called Common Sense. He explained the economic exploitation of America by Britain.
2. Benjamin Franklin: He established philosophical society of America to create awakening and awareness.
3. Henry Pattrick: Provoked the people when he said that give me death or independence.

External Events

1. 7 year war between France and Britain wrecked Britain economically. It gave promotion to American goods and industry. For the first time America got free hand to take their product directly to world marke. This increased the status of America and energised its people.
2. Defeat of French in the North. It ended the French fear for American colonies.

**Discuss the important Events**

  

Grenville Policy

Britain was going under financial crisis after 7 years war and was desperately needing money. Grenville (British PM) imposed new taxes on Americ e.g stamp duty, sugar duty.

Imposed old restrictions on American trade and commerce like navigation law of 1651.

Americans raised the issue of Englishman Resolution (1689) which promised representation in parlimaent to tax paying section. Americans raised the slogans of No Taxation Without Representation.

Formation of organisations like Son's of Liberty and Daughter's of Liberty which raided stamp vendors and burnt down stamps.

  

Ruckingham Declaration

Britain failed to see the real cause for agitation and through this declaration abolished stamp duties.

  

Boston Massacre

Samuel Adams led a mass protest in Boston. Britain committed the mistake of taking military action which led to Boston Massacre. 

It was the beginning of new political phenomenon i.e. protest by the people for their rights from the ruler. This was not possible in pre modern age because of the concept of divine rights.

  

Boston Tea Party

Britain imposed tax on tea imports in America. This was widely resented. Samuel Adams disguised himself and others as native Indians, entered the port and threw all Tea into the Atlantic Ocean. Britain closed the Boston port and this led to further protests.

  

Philadelphia Convention of 1774

1. Formation of American Union. Unity of American colonies against exploitation of Britain.
2. Americans sent Olive Branch Petition. They were still ready to be under the parentage of Britain on the condition that restriction on trade should be remove and representation in parliament.

2nd Philadelphia Convention

1. America declared itself independent.

Battle of Lexington and Concord

The $ army was led by George Washington. After some initial reverses they were able to defeat English. They were helped in this cause by French who wanted to seek revenge from old foe. Later Spain also joined hands in defeating Britain.

Cornwallis surrendered.

  

Paris Treaty

Britain accepted the independence of America.

  

3rd Philadelphia Convention (1787)

1. American Colonies turned into American Union which was later called as United States.
2. It was a Republic. Head of the state was to be elected.
3. Birth of man made constitution based on the principle of humanism providing liberty and equality of the people.

Evaluation

1. Modern democratic set up.
2. IR -> Economic Revolution | AR -> Political Revolution
3. Promotion to modern political ideology like liberty, equality. Fundamental Rights. Beginning of demand of rights from common people.
4. Dominance of common man in admin and politics. Slogan of govt of the people, by the people and for the people
5. Inspiration to other colonies. Soon colonies in South America revolted against Spain and got independence.
6. Inspiration for French Revolution

  

AMERICAN CIVIL WAR

  

After the American Revolution US underwent massive expansion. It was divided into North and Southern states along the Maxon Dixon Line.

  

**How did US expand after American Revolution?**

1. Louisiana the largest state was purchased from Napolean in France in 1803.
2. Florida was taken from Spain.
3. Native Indians were removed from their territories and were sent to the west of Mississippi river.
4. Mexico was defeated in a war during 1846-48 and states of Nevada, California, Colorado etc were incorporated.
5. Thus US grew from 13 states to 48 states by the middle of the 19th century.

**Discuss the economic situation in Northern and Southern States.**

  

Northern States

1. These states were New York, New Jersey, Michigan etc.
2. They were Industrialised, rich followed capitalism and had access to vast natural resources.
3. There were 1200 cotton mills. Business, banking and shipping sectors developed.
4. Universities of Harvard and Yale began to attract large number of students.
5. Construction of canals and railroads.
6. These states received large number of immigrants from Europe who were liberal and had progressive outlook.
7. Demanded strong tariff policy to protect industry from European competition.
8. Wished to abolish slavery out of humanitarian concern. Feared that western states would also come under slavery.

Southern States

1. These states were South Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi, Florida and Texas.
2. Economically backward. Feudalism dominated.
3. Agricultural economy. Plantation dominated e.g Cotton, Tobacco were dominant crops. Cotton was king.
4. They opposed increase of tariff duty as they imported their agri tools from Europe
5. Employed large number of slaves on farms. Slaves were mostly brought from West Africa. They had no right and could not become free. They were subjected to torture and flogging. Plantation workers were haughty, aristocratic.
6. They were against the abolition of slavery and considered any such move to be harmful to their economy and as evil designs of northern territory.

**How did Northern and Southern States viewed the system of slavery?**

  

Northern States

1. Northern condemned slavery as it was against their conscience. Britain had outlawed slavery in 1833.
2. Number of anti-slavery societies were formed in cities e.g New England Anti Slavery Society (1832) and American Anti-Slavery Society (1833).
3. William Garrison started an anti slavery newspaper The Liberator.
4. Uncle Toms Cabin a novel by Ms Stowe reflected the miserable condition of slaves in Southern States.
5. Northern were afraid that slavery would spread to newly conquered territories.

Southern States

1. There were 4.5 million slaves. Southern states viewed slavery as a source of sustenance and believed that without plantation workers their economy would be doomed.
2. The Fugitive Slave Act (1850) forced the northern states to arrest the escaped slaves and hand back to the owner.
3. They blamed Northern States for encouraging revolt of the states.

**Discuss the events leading upto Civil War.**

  

Missouri Agreeement (1820)

It was meant to keep balance between anti slavery north and pro slavery south. It admitted Missouri as a state where slavery could be practiced and Maine where slavery was prohibited. 

  

Dred Scott Incident (1857)

Dred Scott, a slave, went to the north and lived there for some time. He petitioned the Supreme Court to make him a free citizen on the ground that he had lived in free states. SC denied him free citizenship. SC declared Missouri Compromise as unconstitutional. It ruled that Congress had no power to decide on the issue of slavery.

  

Rise of Republican Party

Republican Party was born to end slavery in US. At that time Congress was dominated by members from the South. Republicans desired introduction of high tariff on imported goods to protect business interest in North whereas southern states were dead against it.

  

7 States Leave the Union

South Carolina, Florida, Mississippi etc. left the union and formed Federation of States in 1861. Lincoln stated that states had no right to secede from the union. He declared that Union was older than Constitution.

Southern states formed a Confederacy and declared Jefferson Davis as its President. It hoped of gaining support from Britain and France. 

  

Course of The Civil War

1. The war broke when southern states attackd Fort Sumter. The fall of fort led Lincoln to declare war against south.
2. Lincoln declared a state of emergency and suspended all civil liberties enjoyed by citizens.
3. He raised a force of 30,000 troops and ordered them to march to Richmond, Virginia which was the capital of Confederates. The Union troops were however defeated.
4. James Brown raided military arsenal and supplied arms and ammunition to slaves to fight against their masters. A large number of liberated slaves helped Union forces during the war as volunteers.
5. Commander Ulysses Grant led a major campaign and captured Confederate forts. This was followed by victory in the famous Battle of Gettysberg in 1863.
6. The victory in Gettysberg ended the war.

**Reasons for South's Defeat?**

1. North had a population of 23 million which was wealth compared to poor Southern states which had only 9 million population.
2. The North enjoyed better communication system, railroad and weapons. The industrial development gave an edge over backward south.
3. Britain remained neutral during the war. South expected Britain to intervene as it was a major importer of cotton from south. Britain hailed the emancipation proclamation by Lincoln. The relationship between Britain and North eased. Britain imported sufficient quantity of cotton from India and wheat from Northern States.
4. The Northern generals adopted better strategy and had better navy through which it imposed naval blockage which prevented flow of arms and ammunition to southern states.

**Outcome of War?**

1. **After the passage of 13th Amendment slavery was abolished. The unity of the union was preserved.**
2. **Both sides suffered heavy casualties.** **South was totally devastated and its economy collapsed.**
3. **Through 14th and 15th amendment civil rights were extended to former male slaves.**
4. **It acted as catalyst for industrialisation of US. By the end of 19th century US became an industrial giant.**
5. **In the South unlawful and anti social organisations like Ku Klux Klan and the Knights of the White Camellia (white supremacist groups) took to kidnapping and torturing black people. The prejudiced towards blacks manifested for a long time.**
6. **Civil war was the message of efficiently handling of internal crisis by mature leaders.**

**Discuss the Role of Abraham Lincoln?**

Background

1. Lincoln (1809 - 1865) was born in a poor family in Kentucky and did not have any formal education. He showed keen interest in studies and passed bar examination and started practising as a lawyer in 1836. He impressed people with his "shrewdness, common sense and honesty". He earned the nickname "Honest Abe". 
2. He became a member of House of Representatives and joined Republican Party in 1856.
3. He stood for Presidential election and defeated Stephen Douglas (ardent supporter of slavery). He became the 16th President of USA.

Role in Slavery Abolition

1. He argued that slavery was morally wrong and opposed its extention into new territories. 
2. He stated that important priority for him was American union which was formed by the sacrifice of ancestors. This created an emotional wave.
3. He took military action against south. He took help of volunteers for propagating the cause of American union.
4. He succeeded in moving the 13th amendment in 1865. By this amendment slavery was abolished in America. He showed exemplary leadership and maturity in handling internal crisis.
5. After the civil war he planned the reconstruction of south.
6. He was assassinated on 14 April, 1865.

Quotation

1. Gettysberg Address : "Government of the people, by the people and for the people"

  

  

FRENCH REVOLUTION

  

**Reasons?**

Economic Causes

1. Disastrous policies of Louis XVI. Participation of French forces in the American war of Indpendence had completely ruined the French economy.
2. Louis XIV declared himself the state and fought innumerable wars. The king was interested in worldly pleasures and did not care for the welfare of the people.
3. Irresponsible expenditure of royal households worsened the situation. The palace of Versailles was called as the graveyard of the national income. The government resorted to borrowing from public and defaulted on its debt.
4. The Queen Marie Antoinette lived in luxury and did not care for the plight of the masses. She is associated with the famous remark - "If they don't have bread let them eat cakes?"
5. To meet expenditure Louis XVI tried to impose new taxes on people which met wide resistance.
6. Church owned 20% of land in France and enjoyed its revenues. Any attempt to levy tax on church was threatened met with reply : "Do not make us choose between God and the King, for you know what are answer will be."
7. Peasants paid close to 86% of their income in the form of taxes.

Political

1. Weakening administration led to anarchy in the country.
2. No representation of Third Estate in the governance of the country. The upper middle resented being left out of the civilian and military administration.
3. The first two estates i.e. nobility and clergy did not have to pay any taxes.
4. The king enjoyed power over life by issuing the notorious letter de catchet by which persons were imprisoned without any trial.

Social

1. Differences between privileged and non privileged class. Clergy, Nobles and Common man. The Church formed the 1st estate and enjoyed all the privileges, the nobles the second state and the common man the third estate.
2. A majority of bishops lived a life of luxury.

Age of Reason / Role of Intellectuals

1. **Voltaire**: Creativity is the biggest force. Freedom of expression. Newton and Galileo are bigger than Alexander and Caesar. The best way to promote creativity is through Freedom of Expression.
2. **Montesquieu**: Rejected autocratic government and called for responsible government. This could only be achieved through separation of power.
3. **Rousseau:** His Social Contract theory caused a sensation. He gave a stirring slogan - "Man is born free but everywhere in chains". Kingship is not the gift of the God to the kings. It is the outcome of the contract between the rulers and the ruled and king should respect the will of the people. This can be only respected by giving Liberty, Equality and Fraternity to the people.
4. **Didrouet:** He prepared the encyclopaedia of the problem faced by France alongwith solution to those problem. He denounced the role of religion in polity and administration. He gave the promotion to the concept of secularism.

The intellectuals of France not only acted as a guide for France but they provided the fundamental philosophy of modern polity and administration.

  

Immediate Cause

1. The drought of 1788-89 broke the peasant's back. A loaf of bread now cost his full day's wage. Pesants left their villages for cities in the hope of getting their problems resolved.
2. The success of American Revolution inspired the French. Many of the French generals had participated in American war.

**Discuss Important Events during French Revolution**

  

Estates General

1. Amidst political deadlock Louis XVI tried to use force against people. He started ruling France through Ordinance which gave birth to riots in different parts. People demanded the invitation of estates general.
2. Louis XVI invited estates general. Large number of people started moving towards Paris. People demanded change in voting pattern as 5% of the population enjoyed 2/3rd vote and the voice of common people were ignored. They demanded voting rights as per population ratio and voting rights based on One Person, One Vote.
3. Louis XVI closed the doors of the assembly. People gathered in a nearby Tennis court and declared themselves as national representative aspiring to frame the constitution for France. Thus a national assembly was born.
4. Louis XVI committed 2 blunders: He dismissed Necker  who was a sympathiser of common man. This sent a wrong message to the people that the king was acting against people. He started gathering troops in Paris.

Fall of Bastille (14 July 1789)

1. Basille was fort cum prison and a symbol of royal despotism. The motive of the people was to release political prisoners and to gather arms and ammunition. Fall of Basille became the inspiration for direct action in France. Old ruling class Manors  (residing place of feudal lords) became the special target of the people.
2. Formation of National Guards under General Lafayatte. This was the biggest development as army came under the command of the common people. Tricolour flag of the revolution was adopted. 
3. Begining of modern administrative system as the people in Paris established Municipal Corporation in Paris to manage the city. This was called Paris commune.
4. It signified victory of common man on autocracy and aristocracy.
5. When the King heard about the fall of Bastille, he said - "This is a great revolt" but his minister replied - "No, Sir, It's a great revolution!"
6. The King had to recognise National Assembly and took Necker into service.
7. Some liberal minded nobles and clergy came forward to renounce their rights and privileges.

Peasant Revolt

1. Peasants rose against the nobles and burnt their castles.
2. Municipal governments were formed on the Paris model in all towns.
3. Feudalism, titles, serfdom stood abolished.

Drafting of Constitution (1791)

The power centre in France after the Fall of Basille was National Assembly and it drafted the first constitution of France in 1791.

The important features were:

1. It included the "Declaration of the Rights of Man". It asserted that "all men are free and equal". Freedom of expression, Judicial Rights, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity.
2. Constitutional Monarchy: People were not against monarchy but against inequality and exploitation. 
3. A single assembly instead of bicameral legislature was formed. The members were elected by indirect election through electoral college. King became only the nominal head and had limited veto right.
4. There was no universal suffrage and voting rights were restricted to those who paid taxes.
5. A decentralised system of government was introduced.
6. Religion was subordinated to the state as people got the right to elect the priestly class and they took the oath of loyalty to the state. Pope became the superficial religious head and church property was nationalised.
7. Mixed Economy: Equal respect for capitalism and socialism. It started the new currency Assignats (paper currency).

King Flees

1. Louis XVI had enough and he hatched a plan to escape and win back his empire. However, he was caught escaping and brought back to Paris. This further infuriated the masses as they labelled King as traitor and as someone who was deserting them in the need of hour.

Political Clubs

1. Two prominent clubs Jacobians and Cordelier was born. 
2. Jacobians consisted of assembly members and local politicians. Maxmillian Robospierre was the most influential leader of Jacobian club. Jacobians gained control over the assembly and forced it to obey their wishes.
3. It had more than 2000 branches all over France.
4. The members of Cordelier were from lower strata of society. It thought of establishing a republic with the worker's support. Danton was its popular leader. It remained restricted to Paris only and did not have any branches.

Revolutionary Wars

1. European countries like Prussia, Austria declared war against France as they did not want to meet the same fate as Louis XVI. They wanted to contain the spread of the nationalist movement and restore monarchy in France.
2. They made a declaration of Pilnitz (1791). It threatened the success of revolution and led to dangerous situation.

Reign of Terror

1. Marat, a Jacobian leader, used to publish furious and provoking messages in the newspaper. He called for execution of anti revolutionaries. Robospierre was the man in charge. He unleashed bloodshed by conducting trials and putting to death all anti revolutionist and sympathiser of monarchy. 
2. Thousands of execution were carried out and people could be sent to trial even on trivial matters such as complaining against rise in food prices.
3. All dissenters were put to death and a special machine Guillotine was designed to cause speedy, painfree death.
4. Louis XVI and his wife Marie Antoinette were executed.
5. Ultimately people became fed up of the violence and Maxmillian Robospiere the chief architect of the revolution was himself put to death. This ended the cycle of violence and restored temporary peace.

National Convention (1792 - 95)

1. France became Constitutional republic as there was no king in France.
2. The country was to have 2 houses: Upper House and Lower House. The proposals were to be made in the upper house but they can be only passed in the lower house.
3. Religion became the personal affair and lost all support from the state.
4. Prices of food grains and goods were fixed by the "laws of maximum".
5. Complete abolition of feudal custom and manners and everybody was addressed as citizen.
6. Capitalist were declared enemies and prices of commodities were fixed. Emphasis on communism.
7. Slavery was eradicated.
8. Compulsory military service and a code of law for the whole country was introduced.

However, the convention had several shortcomings.

1. The interference of state in personal lives of people was resented.
2. Doing away with the authority of the church irritated the catholic population.
3. Emphasis on communism frightened the capitalist class

**Discuss the importance of French Revolution**

1. It was a landmark event in the history of mankind. It was an attempt to build a new society on the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity.
2. It rejected tyranny, divine right and feudalism. 
3. It wished to establish an egalitarian society.
4. Total separation of religion from the state was brought about. It laid the foundation of modern secular state. The education system was built on secular foundations.
5. It ushered in the era of nationalism and liberalism and paved the way for revolutions in other parts of Europe.

FRANCE UNDER NAPOLEAN

  

**Napolean Bonaparte**

Napolean was born on August 15, 1769 in the island of Corsica. The island was a colony of France. Napolean secured a scholarship to study at Royal Military College. He had once contemplated joining English East India Company (that would have been awesome !)

  

Turlom Expedition

1. Napolean was sent to Turlom to repel British naval fleet. There was certainly a vaccuum and opportunity for officers who could prove themselves under fire. He successfully handled the situation. 
2. British fled and Turlom was recaptured. In just 3 months he rose from Captain to Brigadier General. He was finally made Commander of the army after he successfully thwarted a revolt in Paris and saved National Convention. 
3. He married Marie Josephine, a 32 year old widow. She was a member of high society and had political links and was mistress of the ruler.

Italian Expedition

1. Italy was under the control of Austria. Napolean was sent to Italian Alps. His assignment was to challenge the power of allies of Prussia. Everyone made fun of him for French army was ill equipped. Napolean was in no condition to win anything. However, through his inspirational speeches he tranformed French Army into a fighting machine
2. Within just 2 weeks he won 6 battles. He was hailed as "liberator" in Italy.

After the victory he dictated the terms of the treaty with Austria and signed the Treaty of Campofornia and he turned into a hero of France. According to the treaty:

1. Rhineland became the natural frontier of France. France got the control on Coal and Iron deposits of the region.
2. He was accepted as guardian of Italian republic.
3. He also got control on Netherlands and Lombardy.
4. He gifted the area of rich natural resources to France at the time of crisis and that too free of cost. The expenditure of the whole expedition was borne by the defeated forces. 

Egyptian Expedition

1. He landed in Egypt in a hope to disrupt British trade routes with India. Egyptians were part of Turkish empire ruled by Mamaluks who were known for their cruelty. Napolean defeated them in the Battle of Pyramids (1798). He led his army into Cairo and wasted much time in enjoyment.
2. His dreams were quickly shattered. His fleet of warships was destroyed by British fleet led by Nelson, the famous British admiral. 
3. After this defeat he spent lot of time in studying Egypt. Egypt was an enigma for Europeans. He brought remarkable groups of mathematicians (e.g Cauchy), architects and scientists. They produced 24 volumes on Egypt. Rosetta stone was the most important discovery.  
4. In 1799 he took his army to Syria. He assaulted Acra. French soldiers perished in bubonic plague. He had to return to Acra.
5. He secretly returned to France leaving 30,000 soldiers in Egypt. The govt in Paris was in disarray. He dreamed of rescuing France. The campaign in Egypt, a military disaster was projected as a successful campaign. The people hailed him as the conqueror of Egypt. 
6. Napolean was aware that rule of Directory was highly unpopular. The debt was mounting, bandits roamed the countryside.  He planned a military coup and found a way to seize power.

Coup d'etat

1. With the help of his brother he overthrew the Directory in 1799.
2. A provisional three councils was set up. Later NB dismissed the 2 councils made himself the head of the state. 
3. He organised Sainklu Convention and became the first council in 1799. He later crowned himself King. Just 15 years back French people had executed King and now they crowned a new one ! 
4. Napolean divorced his wife and married the daughter of ruler of Habsburg empire in order to have a son.

**Discuss reforms undertaken by Napolean.**

  

Economic

1. Peace with Europe: Appealed to the rulers of Austria and England asking them the utility of war in the era of prosperity and development. Treaty of Ameims between England and France leading to friendly relations between two countries.
2. He took steps for increasing fertility of the soil, barren and unproductive lands were brought under cultivation. He also adopted liberal attitude towards farmers.
3. Established Bank of France to strengthen and manage currency system.
4. Chamber of commerce and commercial exchange was founded. He improved the system of taxation.
5. France also witnessed industrial revolution. Means of tranport and communications were improved. Many canals, roads and bridges were built. Napolean was particularly interested in beautiful cities and made Paris the most attractive city in Europe.
6. He never bothered about land reforms and did not give promotion to industrialisation. French economy was still backward and weak.
7. He ignored the advice of Fulton to introduce Steam Boats in France. 

Political

1. Turned France from republic to monarchy. He organised Plebisite in France. He got 30 lakh votes in support and on this ground he became the emperor of France in 1804
2. He established 4 Houses: Council of States, Senate, Tribunate and Legislative Body and introduced a Unique voting system known as 10 % law. It was a list system. District (10%) -> State (10%) -> Centre (10%). From Centre list only Napolean could pick members for 4 houses.
3. Bureaucrats were called Prefects. Appointment and transfers of these officers was in the hands of Napolean and they were only responsible to Napolean.
4. It was a democracy only in name. It was completely under the control of Napolean.
5. Centralisation was the chief characteristic of his rule.
6. He sold Louisiana territory in North America to USA as he was in need for money.

Educational

1. National Assembly took out education from the hands of religion when it established National Education Council. Napolean established secular institution for education for primary to higher education.
2. Napoleanism was part of the syllabus. Glorification of Napolean was done in schools.
3. A number of technical schools were founded in France.
4. He neglected primary education.

Law

1. Napolean Code. He codified modern law and set up Code of Civil and Criminal Procedure, Commercial code etc. His codes are still relevant and followed.
2. It provided individual rights and duties and organised all spheres of social life and institutions. The duties of parents and children were defined.

Others

1. Started the Legion of Honour.
2. Concordat Agreement - Pope was accepted nominal religious head of the Nation. Catholic religion was declared as the religion of the majority.
3. He misbehaved with Pope during his coronation ceremony at Notredam.

All his reforms were basically meant to strengthen his position. France still lagged behind in economy, polity and culture.

  

**Give an account of blunders of Napolean and his subsequent Fall.**

  

Numerous Wars

He fought approximately 40 wars. The important wars were:

1. Battle of Astroliptz: Defeated the combined armies of Austria and Prussia. Napolean considered it as one of his greatest victory.
2. Battle of Iaana: He defeated Prussian army and destroyed the Holy Roman Empire.
3. Battle of Iaaloo: Russia was defeated. Through the Treaty of Tilsit Russia became the friend of France

These wars caused much resentment among European powers and they united against Napolean.

  

Continental Policy

1. Britain was a super power during Napolean and was economically, industrially and militarily advanced. Napolean was not able to defeat her in war. His defeat in Trafalgar Square was a shock to his dreams. But he was determined to challenge the authority. As European nations were the biggest importer of British products, he sought to impose a ban on imports and trade relations with Britain. He hoped that this would wreck Britain economically.
2. He made 3 declarations: Berlin (1806), Milan (1807), Fontebeleiau (1808)
3. It proved to be harmful because Britain had a huge market outside of Europe. On the other hand import of industrial goods harmed France and European countries and caused economic hardships.
4. Russia left France on this issue and this was the beginning of rift between France and Russia.

Spanish Ulcer

1. Violation of Sovereignty : France often violated the sovereignty of Spain during its military campaign. Its forces used to cross Spain without taking permission from Spain.
2. Ferdinand Episode : King Ferdinand of Spain was facing some internal crisis and Napolean replaced him by his brother Joseph. This was a cause for much resentment in Spain
3. Land Reforms of Ferdinand : Joseph started snatching away land from Feudal lords and distributed to farmers but it united aristocrats against him and they raised the slogan of Spanish nationalism. Napolean wasted a lot of resource in fighting Spain and managed to turn a friend into enemy.
4. Napolean was not able to break the will of the people and went against the advice.

Russian Disaster

Napolean attacked Russia. He initially secured easy victories and captured Moscow but met with stiff resistance afterward. However, lakhs of soldiers perished in the freezing cold weather of Russia. The campaign ended in a big failure and out of 6,00,000 soldiers that had gone to fight only 90,000 returned. The French army no longer existed as fighting force. The weakening of Napolean gave an opportunity to others to unite and seek revenge.

  

End of Napolean

1. Prussia, Britain, Russia inflicted a crushing defeat on Napolean in the Battle of Leipzig. He renounced his throne in 1814. He drank the poison but did not die. 
2. He was imprisoned in Elba and was expected to spend rest of his life here. He became Emperor of isle of Elba and regained work and action. He set up a miniature court and even a flag! 
3. He returned back and ruled France for 100 days. He was finally defeated at Waterloo by a combined force of Prussia and Britain. He was captured and deported to island of St. Helena where he died in 1821.

Impact of Napolean

1. Took the ideas of FR to different parts of Europe through his 40 wars. He gave promotion to Nationalism in these countries.
2. Promotion to Education and Law.
3. Defeated and wiped out smaller states which ultimately became the cause for unification of Germany and Italy.

**10 Great Quotations**

1. _"I found the crown of France in gutter and I picked it up"_
2. _"The Man of Genius always gets back to his feet"_
3. _"There is always one step between sublime and ridiculous"_
4. _"My power depends on my glory and glory depends upon victory"_
5. _"Everything on earth is soon forgotten except the opinion we leave imprinted in history. There is no immortality but the memory that we leave in the minds of the men"_
6. _"Conquest alone made me what I am and conquest alone would keep me where I am."_
7. _"Religion is excellent stuff for keeping people quiet."_
8. _"It is better to Eat than being Eaten."_
9. _"Liberty can not be secured unless criminals lose their head."_
10. _"Great men become great because they have mastered Luck."_

**Discuss the significance of Vienna Congress ?**  

  

It took place in 1815 and was based on Principle of Legitimacy and Principle of Compensation.

  

Reasons

1. To put the house in order and strengthen existing political system in Europe.
2. Maintain checks on events like FR and Napolean
3. Maintain balance of power in Europe.

Principle of Legitimacy

Return back to the old state to their original ruling houses.

1. Louis XVIII became emperor of France.
2. Holland was returned to Orange family.
3. Papal states were restored back to Pope.

Principle of Compensation

Power that fought with Napolean wanted their share of profit and compensation. As a result

1. Russia got Finland and control on Poland.
2. Sardinia and Prussia got large share in their areas which finally compelled them for unification of Germany and Italy.
3. Austria got Venice and Lombardy and it also became the head of German states.

Promotion to Alliance System

It was formed to handle events like FR and Napolean.

1. Holy Alliance_:_ Proposed by Czar Alexander I of Russia. Motive was to unite Christian powers of Europe on grounds of religion. It was not taken seriously
2. Quadruple Alliance_:_ Included Russia, Austria, Prussia and Britain. Finally France was also admitted. It was called Concert of Europe.

Suppression of Nationalism

Nationalism was the binding force for common people so it became the main target for the reactionary forces in Europe. e.g Suppression of revolt in Naples in 1820

  

Vienna convention was thus the victory of reactionary forces and provided peace in Europe for next 30 years.

  

UNIFICATION OF DEUTSCHLAND

  

**Reasons?**

Situation

1. Germany was divided into West Phalia, Rhineland, Bohemian Plateau, Prussia but shared common bond of unity. German language, race and culture.
2. It was an area of gifted resources but was backward. This was the pain for intelligentsia in Germany

Exploitation

They always had a non German ruler. Earlier they were part of Holy Roman Empire and after the Vienna Convention the control passed over in the hands of Austrian empire. It went against the interest of German states. 

  

Impact of Napolean

Napolean abolished the smaller states in West Germany and established the single state of West Phalia which started giving promotion to Trade and Commerce in this area. This acted as a catalytic force for German unification. Napolean gave the taste and importance of unity to German states.

  

Thinkers

1. Fichte gave the concept of German idealism which was based on the principle of superiority of German culture and race.
2. F.W.Neitzche of Master morality and Slave Morality. He raised the slogan of Live Dangerously.

**Discuss the events leading to unification**

  

German Diet

In Vienna Congress Austria was declared as the head of German states. There were 38 states and it was not possible to administer. Therefore it formed German Diet having the members nominated by Kings of German states. This led to the beginning of crude political unity of German states. The features were:

1. General resolutions can be passed by 2/3rd majority
2. Fundamental and Constitutional changes can only be done by acceptance of all the states.

Zolleverein

Prussia passed Zolleverein i.e custom union of German states. This gave promotion to trade and commerce in Germany and led to economic unity.

  

Revolutions

Revolutions of 1830 and 1848 gave momentum to revolution.  Charles X had succeeded the Louis XVIII. He became autocratic and had to finally leave the throne in 1830. Kingship lost the divine rights. King became the representative of common people and had to work according to the wish of the common people. 

  

The year 1847 saw economic depression in Britain. This had a cascading effect in Europe as trouble started brewing. This created hardships for working class and led to revolution in 1848 and in which labour class moved on to street to fight for their rights. Karl Marx came out with his communist manifesto in 1848. The revolutions put a question mark on the exisiting political set up and the only acceptance for the ruler was to accept the wish of the people.

  

2nd Frankfurt Parliament

It was attended by representatives of German states. The basic agenda was to frame the constitution for German people. The question was to frame 38 different constitution or single constitution. It declared a German Union under the leadership of Prussia. But things took U-turn and Prussia rejected the proposal because:

1. It wanted to be the real head of German union and for that the proposal was to be given by rulers of the state but here it was given by representative of state.
2. It was warned by Austria as not to get involved in any such activity.

**Disuss the Role of Bismarck**

He is known as the _Wonderman of World History_. He was appointed as Chancellor of Prussia by King William and gave the Policy of Blood and Iron. He was clear that war with Austria was a necessity. He pushed for modernisation of army despite facing opposition from Parliament. He undertook economic reforms and followed an Entrapment policy.

  

Economic Reforms

1. He set up Imperial Banks, railways, roads, industrialisation
2. He gave promotion to the concept of state socialism which provided safety and security to labour class e.g employment security. 

Entrapment Policy

  

_Danish Adventure_

Denmark had annexed Schleswig and Holstein which was a disputed territory. A combined attack of Prussia and Austria defeated Denmark. Bismarck got to know the strength and weakness of Austrian army during this expedition.

  

_Defeat of Austria_

Bismarck started alienating Austria by:

1. Adopting pro Russia attitude in Poland and signed an agreement with Russia where it had to maintain its neutrality in case of war.
2. He promised Italians to help in their unification.
3. Made commitment of big gifts to Napolean III of France.

He finally provoked Austria by annexing Holstein. Austrians were defeated in the Battle of Sadova (1866). This united all the northern territory and completed the first phase of German unification.

  

_Defeat of France_

1. Napolean III committed the mistake of making his demands in writing. Bismarck showed this letter to other European powers revealing France's nefarious designs and annoyed them.
2. The final provocation came in the form of Elms Telegram episode, where Bimarck changed the words of telegram to show France that Prussia had insulted its ambassador Beneditti. The incident provoked people of France and they declared war which was exactly what Bismarck wanted. 
3. France was comprehensively defeated in the Battle of Sedan (1871) and this completed German unification.

It was a masterstroke by Bismarck. All the powers failed to understand his real intention and by the time they understood it was already too late.

  

**What was the policy of Blood and Iron. Does it hold relevance today?**

  

Policy

1. Otto von Bismarck gave his famous “Blut und Eisen” (“Blood and Iron”) speech before the Landtag, the Prussian legislature. In his speech, he claimed that the international policy of a modern state is built upon the willingness to fight - “Blut” (blood) and the willingness to spend vast amounts of public treasure in creating giant armies — “Eisen” (iron).  "The great questions of the time will not be resolved by speeches and majority decisions ... but by iron and blood,". 
2. He embarked on an ambitious programme of militarisation. He not only raised a large number of soldiers but also imparted them training in the use of new weapons. As a result, the military strength of Prussia considerably increased. He used his diplomatic skill to isolate his target to attack. He did not wait for international crises to render his task easier.

Relevance Today  

1. A state policy of huge armies and an aggressive attitude toward neighbors threatens liberty and morality in different ways. A nation engaged in an arms race like Bismarck’s Prussia can not only plot wars but can also stumble into wars, as was the case in the First World War.
2. Arms races dramatically increase national government spending, so after 1871, the German Empire, France and Britain all increased military spending (reducing the amount of their wealth that taxpayers could keep). It is impossible to have a vast, sprawling military without also having a vast, sprawling government.
3. Reliance upon force rather than consent — upon military power rather than treaties, trade is no path to long term peace, prosperity, or moral government.
4. When we stray from that path of mutal peace, it amounts to embracing the Machiavellian policy which leads to neither peace nor prosperity.

  

UNIFICATION OF ITALY

  

**Reasons?**

1. Common bond of unity among Italian states.
2. Italy was the gateway of Europe and it was always the bone of contention between Austria and France. This led to the exploitation by different empires.
3. Napolean abolished smaller states and established republics implementing uniform political and administrative structure. This acted as a catalytic for Italian unification.
4. Italian cities were centres of Renaissance

**Events?**

Carbonary

1. Carbonary. Birth of secret organisation. The objective was to revolt and work for unification but in the absence of powerful and external support Carbonary was doomed to fail and Austria suppressed such revolts e.g suppression of revolts in 1820.
2. Failure of carbonary gave the message to intellectual class that mass awakening is the important priority of unification.

Mass Awakening

The most important role was played by Mazzini who is also called the profet of Italian unification. He established Young Italy Movement which was a secret organisation. The motive was to awaken people. Austria was the biggest hurdle in unification.

  

Cavour

Played a very crucial role in unification. It gained strength from Vienna Congress and was never under the domination of Austria. The ruler Victor Immanuel was a liberal who introduced constitutional reforms in Sardinia. So it was an ideal stage to take up the cause.

  

Cavour was appointed the Chancellor of Sardinia. He was brave, forsighted and possessed intellectual personality.

1. He took steps for economic and military empowerment of Sardinia.
2. He was clear that foreign assistance was required for unification. To seek help from England and France he sent his army to Crimea to fight in the Crimean War against Russia although he had no grudge against Russia. Italian army played a very important role.
3. In the Paris Peace Conference (1856) Cavour was invited as a representative of Italy. This was a diplomatic victory as Italy got acceptance as separate identity. But Italy got only assurance but there was no practical help.
4. He turned towards France and promised Napolean III big gifts in return for his help. By the Treaty of Plombiers. Napolean accepted to give assistance. Sardinia fought a war against Austria and was successful.
5. Austria traced the support to France and convinced Napolean III to stay away. Napolean III was a fickleminded person and so he pulled back his support. This was a blow to Cavour but the first phase of unification was completed.

Impact of Revolutions of 1830 and 1848

1. Awakened people started demanding responsible government and constitution.
2. Formation of revolutionary councils in 1860 in which activeness of people compelled most of the states to join Italian union.

Garibaldi

Naples, Sicily and Papal states had still not joined the union. Garibaldi with his Force of Thousands entered Naples and he was successful in getting complete mass support and forced the ruler of Naples to surrender. The story was repeated in Sicily and Papal states. Italy became a unified country and lived happily ever after !

  

EASTERN EUROPE

  

Background

1. In 1453 Turks occupied Constantinople. One of the major areas of contention was Balkan countries. It had been under the rule of Ottoman Turks.  They started entering into Europe and occupied Eastern Europe. Turkish rulers never gave equal status to the people of Eastern Europe. 
2. The suppression and exploitation of Eastern European countries by Turks created the inspiration of independence among Eastern European Countries
3. In 19th century Ottoman empire had begun to collapse. This led to revolts by various nationalities for independence. This came to be known as Eastern Question. There was a struggle between Turkey and Eastern European Nation. 

Crimean War

In 1856 Russia was defeated in Crimean War. Britain and France supported Turkey to check Russian advancement.

  

Russia Turkey War

In 1877 Bulgaria attacked Turkey which was immediately joined by Russia leading to war between Russia and Turkey in 1877. Turkey was defeated and compelled for the Treaty of San Stefano. Under this

1. Bulgaria became autonomous power under the protection of Russia
2. Turkey accepted independence of Serbia, Greece, Montenegro etc.
3. Black Sea was accepted as Russian Zone.

The other major powers became increasingly wary of Russian advancement and its influence in Eastern Europe. Germany called for Berline Congress to settle the question.

  

**Berlin Congress (1878)**

1. It was a meeting of leading statesmen of Great Powers of Europe and the Ottoman Empire.
2. It was held after the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78. Russia had emerged victorious in the war and to curtail Russia's gain Bismarck organised the conference.
3. The aim was to reorganise the countries of Balkans. Ottoman Empire was called as the "sick man of Europe".
4. Bulgaria was established as independent principality within Ottoman Empire. Romania achieved full independence.
5. Austria-Hungary took over Bosnia and Herzegovina and Cyprus was given to Britain.
6. Black sea was declared a neutral zone.
7. Russia was humiliated at Berlin.