---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Quotes

Martin Luther King

1. Faith is taking the first step even when you can't see the whole staircase
2. Darkness can't drive out darkness, only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate, only love can do that.
3. Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.
4. If you can't fly then run, if you can't run then walk, if you can't walk then crawl, but whatever may you do you have to keep moving forward.
5. There comes a time when one must take a position that is neither safe, nor politic, nor popular but he must take it because 
6. Before you do anything, stop and recall the face of the poorest most helpless destitute person you have seen and ask yourself, Is What I am about to do going to help him?
7. It's the action and not the fruit of the action which is important.
8. Non cooperation with evil is as much a duty as is cooperation with good.
9. In matter of conscience, the law of majority has no place.
10. Victory attained by violence is tantamount to defeat, for it is temporary.
11. The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.
12. A man is the product of his thoughts. What he thinks, he becomes.
13. It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow beings.
14. First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win.
15. Public opinion alone can keep a society pure and healthy.
16. There comes a time when one must take a position that is neither safe, nor politic, nor popular, but he must take it because conscience tells him it is right.”
17. Never, never be afraid to do what's right, especially if the well-being of a person or animal is at stake. Society's punishments are small compared to the wounds we inflict on our soul when we look the other way.
18. The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort and convenience, but where he stands at times of challenge and controversy.
19. A man who won't die for something is not fit to live.
20. Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere
21. We must accept finite disappointment, but never lose infinite hope.
22. If a man is called to be a street sweeper, he should sweep streets even as a Michaelangelo painted, or Beethoven composed music or Shakespeare wrote poetry. He should sweep streets so well that all the hosts of heaven and earth will pause to say, 'Here lived a great street sweeper who did his job well.
23. There comes a time when silence is betrayal
24. Never forget that everything Hitler did in Germany was legal.
25. Wars are poor chisels for carving out peaceful tomorrows
26. The time is always right to do the right thing.
27. Life's most persisten and urgent question is : "What are you doing for others?"
28. Love is the only force capable of tranforming an enemy to a friend.
29. One has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws.
30. Our scientific power has outrun our spiritual power. We have guided missiles and misguided men.
31. If I cannot do great things, I can do small things in a great way.
32. Dante, said that hottest place in hell are reserved for those who in a period of moral crisis maintain their neutrality.
33. Lightning makes no sound until it strikes.
34. Not everybody can be famous but everybody can be great, because greatness is determined by service.
35. A right delayed is a right denied.

  
Bertrand Russell  

1. Do not fear to be eccentric in opinion, for every opinion now accepted was once eccentric
2. The fundamental cause of the trouble is that in modern world the stupids are cocksure while the intelligent are full of doubt.
3. War does not determine who is right - only who is left.
4. Longing for love, search for knowledge and unbearable pity for the suffering of the mankind.
5. The hardest thing in life is which bridge to cross and which to burn.
6. If there were in the world today any large number of people who desired their own happiness more than they desired the unhappiness of others, we could have paradise in a few years.
7. Not to be absolutely certain, is one of the essential things in rationality.

  
Einstein  

1. There are two ways to live your life. One is though nothing is a miracle. The other is as though everything is a miracle.
2. Imagination is more important than knowledge.
3. If you can't explain it to a six year old, you don't understand it yourself.
4. Logic will get you from A to Z; imagination will get you everywhere.
5. Life is like riding a bicycle. To keep your balance, you must keep moving.
6. Anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried anything new.
7. Everybody is a genius. But if you judge a fish by its ability to climb a tree, it will live its whole life believing that it is stupid.
8. I speak to everyone in the same way, whether he is the garbage man or the president of the university.
9. Coincidence is God's way of remaining anonymous.
10. Never memorize something that you can look up.
11. When you are courting a nice girl an hour seems like a second. When you sit on a red-hot cinder a second seems like an hour. That's relativity.
12. I have no special talents. I am only passionately curious.
13. If a cluttered desk is a sign of a cluttered mind, of what, then, is an empty desk a sign?
14. Education is what remains after one has forgotten what one has learned in school.
15. Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not to stop questioning.
16. Try not to become a man of success. Rather become a man of value.
17. The world as we have created it is a process of our thinking. It cannot be changed without changing our thinking.
18. Don't say you don't have enough time. You have exactly the same number of hours per day that were given to Helen Keller, Pasteur, Michaelangelo, Mother Teresa, Leonardo da Vinci, Thomas Jefferson, and Albert Einstein.
19. Great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds
20. You never fail until you stop trying.
21. I know not with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones.
22. Gravitation is not responsible for people falling in love.
23. Any fool can know. The point is to understand
24. The world is a dangerous place to live, not because of the people who are evil, but because of the people who don't do anything about it.
25. It is not that I'm so smart. But I stay with the questions much longer.
26. Everything must be made as simple as possible. But not simpler.
27. “What is right is not always popular and what is popular is not always right.
28. “In the middle of difficulty lies opportunity”
29. The woman who follows the crowd will usually go no further than the crowd. The woman who walks alone is likely to find herself in places no one has ever been before.
30. Blind belief in authority is the greatest enemy of truth.
31. Genius is 1% talent and 99% percent hard work..
32. We all know that light travels faster than sound. That's why certain people appear bright until you hear them speak
33. Only a life lived for others is a life worthwhile.”
34. What a sad era when it is easier to smash an atom than a prejudice
35. “Only those who attempt the absurd can achieve the impossible
36. The hardest thing in the world to understand is the income tax.
37. If people are good only because they fear punishment, and hope for reward, then we are a sorry lot indeed.
38. If there is any religion that could respond to the needs of modern science, it would be Buddhism
39. The tragedy of life is what dies inside a man while he lives

Immanuel Kant  

1. Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, never merely as a means to an end, but always at the same time as an end.”
2. Dare to think

B. R. Ambedkar  

1. I measure the progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved.
2. Life should be great rather than long.

Leo Tolstoy  

1. Everyone thinks of changing the world, but no one thinks of changing himself.
2. Wrong does not cease to be wrong because the majority share in it.
3. To get rid of enemy one must love him.
4. A man is like a fraction whose numerator is what he is and whose denominator is what he thinks of himself. The larger the denominator, the smaller the fraction.

Gautam Buddha  

1. However many holy words you read, however many you speak, what good will they do you if you do not act on upon them?”
2. Do not believe in anything simply because you have heard it. Do not believe in anything simply because it is spoken and rumored by many. Do not believe in anything simply because it is found written in your religious books. Do not believe in anything merely on the authority of your teachers and elders. Do not believe in traditions because they have been handed down for many generations. But after observation and analysis, when you find that anything agrees with reason and is conducive to the good and benefit of one and all, then accept it and live up to it.
3. Doubt everything. Find your own light.”
4. Every morning we are born again. What we do today is what matters most.”
5. Believe nothing, no matter where you read it, or who said it, no matter if I have said it, unless it agrees with your own reason and your own common sense.”

Mahatma Gandhi  

1. Be the change that you wish to see in the world.
2. Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever.
3. An eye for an eye will only make the whole world blind.
4. Seven Deadly Sins. Wealth without work; Pleasure without conscience; Science without humanity; Knowledge without character; Politics without principle; Commerce without morality; Worship without sacrifice.”
5. First they ignore you, then they ridicule you, then they fight you, and then you win
6. God has no religion.
7. Your beliefs become your thoughts; Your thoughts become your words; Your words become your actions; Your actions become your habits; Your habits become your values; Your values become your destiny
8. You must not lose faith in humanity. Humanity is like an ocean; if a few drops of the ocean are dirty, the ocean does not become dirty
9. The future depends on what you do today
10. “Earth provides enough to satisfy every man's needs, but not every man's greed.
11. To believe in something, and not to live it, is dishonest.”
12. There are people in the world so hungry, that God cannot appear to them except in the form of bread
13. “Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable will
14. My Life is My Message
15. You can chain me, you can torture me, you can even destroy this body, but you will never imprison my mind.”
16. The simplest acts of kindness are by far more powerful then a thousand heads bowing in prayer.
17. In doing something, do it with love or never do it at all.
18. To my mind, the life of a lamb is no less precious than that of a human being
19. Always aim at complete harmony of thought and word and deed. Always aim at purifying your thoughts and everything will be well
20. In a gentle way you can shake the world.
21. Poverty is the worst form of violence.
22. A No uttered from deepest conviction is better than a YES merely uttered to please, or worse, to avoid trouble.
23. The difference between what we do and what we are capable of doing would suffice to solve most of the world's problems.
24. Happiness is when what you think, what you say and what you do are in harmony.”

Tagore  

1. The butterfly counts not months but moments, and has time enough

Socrates  

1. The unexamined life is not worth living.
2. There is only one good, knowledge and one evil ignorance.
3. By all means marry; if you get a good wife, you’ll become happy; if you get a bad one, you’ll become a philosopher.
4. He who is not contented with what he has, would not be contented with what he would like to have
5. Know thyself.

Aristotle  

1. No great mind ever existed without a touch of madness.
2. Educating the mind without educating the heart is no education at all.
3. Patience is bitter, but its fruit is sweet.
4. Poverty is the parent of revolution and crime
5. The whole is greater than sum of its parts.
6. We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, therefore , is not an act, but a habit.
7. All persons ought to endeavor to follow what is right, and not what is established.

Bentham  

1. Rarest of all human quality is consistency.

Arthur Schopenhauer  

1. Compassion is the basis of morality.
2. Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits of the world.
3. One should use common words to say uncommon things.
4. Religion is the masterpiece of the art of animal training, for it trains people as to how they shall think.

Mark Twain  

1. It is curious that physical courage should be so common in the world and moral courage so rare.
2. If you tell the truth, you don't have to remember anything
3. The man who does not read has no advantage over the man who cannot read.
4. Classic - a book people praise but don't learn.
5. God created war so that Americans would learn Geography.
6. I do not fear death, I had been dead for billions and billions of years before I was born, and had not suffered the slightest inconvenience from it.
7. Kindness is a language which the deaf can hear and the blind can see.
8. The best way to cheer up yourself is to try to cheer someone else up.

Charles Dickens  
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.  
  
Henry David Thoreau  

1. I learned this, at least, by my experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours.
2. Never look back unless you are planning to go that way.
3. Our life is frittered away by detail. Simplify, simplify.
4. Disobedience is the true foundation of liberty. The obedient must be slaves.
5. Things do not change, we change.
6. Dreams are touchstones of our characters.
7. This world is but a convas for our imagination.

John F. Kennedy  

1. The Chinese use two brush strokes to write the word 'crisis.' One brush stroke stands for danger; the other for opportunity. In a crisis, be aware of the danger--but recognize the opportunity.”
2. Forgive your enemies, but never forget their names.
3. The rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man are threatened.
4. “Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.
5. Conformity is the jailer of freedom and the enemy of growth
6. “A man may die, nations may rise and fall, but an idea lives on. Ideas have endurance without death.
7. One person can make a difference, and everyone should try
8. To those whom much is given, much is expected
9. Mankind must put an end to war - or war will put an end to mankind
10. A child miseducated is a child lost.
11. “Without debate, without criticism no administration and no country can succeed and no republic can survive.
12. We need men who can dream of things that never were
13. Those who dare to fail miserably can achieve greatly
14. The supreme reality of our time is the vulnerability of our planet
15. A journey to Thousand miles begins with one step

Benjamin Franklin  

1. Either write worth reading or do something worth writing.
2. He that can have patience can have what he will.
3. You may delay but time will not.
4. Justice will not be served until those who are unaffected are as outraged as those who are.
5. If everyone is thinking alike then no one is thinking.
6. Instead of cursing the darkness, light a candle.
7. It is the first responsibility of every citizen to question authority.
8. An investment in knowledge always pays the best interest.
9. Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise.
10. Lost time is never found again.

Franklin Roosevelt  

1. The only thing we have to fear is the fear itself.
2. The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much, it is whether we provide enough for those who have litte.

Thomas A. Edison  

1. I have not failed. I've just found 10,000 ways that don't work
2. Many of life's failures are people who did not realise how close they were to success when they gave up.
3. 5% of the people think; 10% of people think they think and the other 85% would rather die than think.
4. Genius is 1% inspiration, 99% perspiration
5. When you have exhausted all possibilities, remember this - you haven't
6. Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.
7. I never did a day's work in my life, it was all fun.
8. The most necessary task of civilization is to teach people how to think. It should be the primary purpose of our public schools. The mind of a child is naturally active, it develops through exercise. Give a child plenty of exercise, for body and brain. The trouble with our way of educating is that it does not give elasticity to the mind. It casts the brain into a mold. It insists that the child must accept. It does not encourage original thought or reasoning, and it lays more stress on memory than observation.
9. Good fortune happens when opportunity meets preparation.

Thomas Paine  

1. Independence is my happiness; the world is my country; to do good my religion.
2. Whatever is the right as a man is also the right of another; and it becomes my duty to guarantee as well as to possess.
3. Those who expect to reap the blessings of freedm must undergo the fatigues of supporting it.
4. The mind once enlightened cannot again become dark.

George Washington  

1. If freedom of speech is taken away, then dumb and silent we may be led, like sheep to the slaughter.
2. My mother was the most beautiful woman I ever saw. All I am I owe to my mother. I attribute my success in life to the moral, intellectual and physical education I received from her
3. Human happiness and moral duty are inseparably connected
4. 99% of failures come from people who make excuses.”
5. Knowledge is in every country the surest basis of public happiness.”
6. “Few men have virtue to withstand the highest bidder

Thomas Jefferson  

1. I can't live without books.
2. Honesty is the first chapter of the book of wisdom.
3. I am a greater believer in luck, and I find the harder I work the more I have of it.
4. On matters of style, swim with the current, on matters of principle stand like a rock.
5. Determine never to be idle. No person will have occasion to complain of the want of time, who never loses any. It is wonderful how much may be done, if we are always doing.

Confucius  
  

1. Consideration for others is the basis of a good life and good society.
2. If your plan is for one year plant rice. If your plan is for ten years plant trees. If your plan is for one hundred years educate children.
3. Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.
4. Don't adjust the goals, adjust the action steps.
5. Give a bowl of rice to a man and you will feed him for a day. Teach him how to grow his own rice and you will save his life.
6. The man who asks a question is a fool for a minute, the man who does not ask is a fool for life.
7. Before you embark on a journey of revenge, dig two graves.
8. It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.
9. Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.
10. It's a universal law -- intolerance is the first sign of an inadequate education. An ill educted person behaves with arrogant impatience, whereas truly profound education breeds humility.

Plato  

1. The beginning is the most important part of the work.

  
Miscellaneous  

1. Before you do anything, stop and recall the face of the poorest most helpless destitute person you have seen and ask yourself, Is What I am about to do going to help him?
2. It's the action and not the fruit of the action which is important.
3. Non cooperation with evil is as much a duty as is cooperation with good.
4. In matter of conscience, the law of majority has no place.
5. Victory attained by violence is tantamount to defeat, for it is temporary.
6. The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.
7. A man is the product of his thoughts. What he thinks, he becomes.
8. It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow beings.