# Untitled Note

[https://www.quora.com/](https://www.quora.com/)

## **Man Sues Neighbour He Paid To Get Wife Pregnant But Failed After 72 Attempts**

##   

  
In Stuttgart, Germany, a court judge must decide on a case of  honourable intentions in a situation where a man hired his neighbour to  get his wife pregnant. It seems that Demetrius Soupolos, 29, said his  former **_beauty queen wife_**, Traute, wanted a child badly, but Demetrius  was told by a doctor that he was sterile. So Soupolos after calming his  wife’s protest, hired his neighbour Frank Maus, 34, to impregnate her.  Since Maus was already married and the father of two children plus  looked very much like Soupolos to boot, the plan seemed good. Soupolos  paid Maus $2,500 dollars and for three evenings a week for the next six  months, Maus tried desperately,**_a total of 72 different times, to  impregnate Traute._**  
  
When his own wife objected, he explained, "I  don’t like this any more than you do, I’m simply doing it for the money.  Try- and understand". When Traute **failed to get pregnant** **_after six months_** however, Soupolos was not understanding and insisted that Maus  have a medical examination, which he did. The doctor’s announcement that  Maus was also sterile shocked every-one _except his wife_, **_who was forced to confess that Maus was not the real father of their children._**  
  

Now  Soupolos is suing Maus for breach of contract in an effort to get his  money back, but Maus refused to give it up because he said he did not  guarantee conception, but only that he would give an _honest effort_!