# MOMB - TC

## Grounding of 2 schools per mandal very important including NREGS works

  

- NREGS work should be completed in next week - MPDO, APO & MPO ni involve cheyandi
- MPDOs, APOs, MPOs ni involve cheyandi.

  

1. Water sump - for storing water of Mission Bhagiratha - Mission Bhagiratha
2. What happened in the last week
3. Finishing of the work - should be good.
4. Whether the SMC understands the work ?
5. Quality of the work should be ensured.
6. Flooring work, door
7. Cement works.
8. Corporate school laga kanapinchali
9. Major & Minor Repairs
10. Plastering
11. Every week meeting - SMC level, Mandal Level
12. Labour payment + Material Payment - mode of payment - payment how. Stock register. Involve _AEOs_ here.
13. Special Officers are not visiting the schools
14. There is a lot of difference between the reports given by the AEs and the Head Masters
15. `15` bags per school can be purchased at the local level.
16. Sand Issue.  Storage.
17. Electrical Works.
18. **Status of tender works - have the tenders been called ?**
19. **Change of special officers**
20. Advance has been given. There is no issue of amount.
21. Make a list of work which needs to be completed.
22. Every week - SMC along with AE should have a meeting, every week Mandal Level meeting and every week District Level meeting
23. Colour of schools will be decided by State Government
24. **EEs should personally visit 2 Model Schools which have been selected**
25. Timeline should be drawn.

  

`Details of Sarpanch & SMC Chairperson`

  

`MPTC & MPP`

  

`ZPTC`

  

Take labour report also per day