---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Review of Block and Anchal

**Circle Officer**

**Progress of Abhiyan Basera**

Under this a survey was done to find out the number of landless people in the anchal. Thererafter, these landless families have been settled either through basgeet parcha, bandobasti of gair majrua khas lands or through purchase of private land.

  

**Operation Dakhal Dahani**

Those who have parcha of the land but have been dispossessed have to be given possession of the land.

  

**Computerization of Jamabandi**

Every anchal has to computerize atleast 15 mauzas.

  

**Jal-Nikay**

Computerisation of records of every water body. The data would include the khata, khesra, area, chauhadi and whether it is encroached or not.

  

**Government Land Database**

Anchal must have a computerised record of all types of government land (khas, aam, bharat sarkar, khas mahal).

  

**Mutation**

Whether the mutation is being done according to 2011 Act or not. Many anchals still follow 70s act. The new act of 2011 is much improved. For instance, the new correction slip and the format for notice is very detailed and minimises the chances of error.

  

Most of the mutation are done without aam & khas soochna which leads to wrong mutation.

  

**Public Land Encroachment**

There are large number of encroachment cases in the anchal. Atleast proceedings should start under the Encroachment Act.

  

**Certificate Cases**

Many COs don't take interest in pursuing Certificate Cases. In the case of Indira Awas Yojana, BDOs have filed certificate cases in the CO office. The CO must initiate proceedings in such cases.

  

**Saturday Meeting with Thana**

In order to resolve land disputes the Revenue Department has made it mandatory to hold a meeting every Saturday.

  

**Status of Rajashva Shivir**

It is mandatory to hold atleast 1 Rajashva Shivir and 1 Dakhal Dahani camp every week.

  

  

  

**BDO**

- Progress under Swachh Bharat Mission.
- PMAY priority list, job card updation and geo tagging.
- Updation work on eLabarthi portal for pension beneficiaries.
- Work under 7 Nischay Yojana