---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Law

[http://www.lawyersclubindia.com/articles/Procedure-for-Criminal-Trial--529.asp#.VmuiRfl97IV](http://www.lawyersclubindia.com/articles/Procedure-for-Criminal-Trial--529.asp#.VmuiRfl97IV)

# Law of Torts

**What is tort?**

A civil wrong other than a mere breach of contract or a breach of trust. 

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Tort | Crime |
| Private wrong, breach of private duties | Public wrong, breach of public duties |
| Object of action is compensation | Object is to punish the wrong doer |
| Individual has to approach a Civil Court | State initiates prosecution |

  

Same act can correspond to both tort and crime. E.g a man falling in a ditch on road.

  

Consumer Protection Act brought specifically for Tort purpose.

  

In action for compensation of torts, plea of stranger to contract is irrelevant. The rule of **absolute liability** was applied. 

  

Both tort and contract are legally enforceable. Contract involves a consent e.g purchase of car. Tort is punitive in spirit.

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Tort | Contract |
| Duty imposed by law | Duty imposed by parties to contract |
| Violation of rights in rem | In personam |
| Intention is taken into consideration | Intention irrelevant |
| Damages are unliquidated | Liquidated |

  

**Essentials?**

    - Wrongful act, act must be recognized by law, it should result in injuria.
    - _Injuria sine damno:_ Infringement of legal right without damage, loss or harm
    - _Damnum sine injuria:_ Damage without infringement of legal right.

In crime mens-rea is necessary, in tort a man is presumed to intend natural or probable consequence of act.

  

**Vicarious Liability?**

- Liability for wrong committed by others.
- Principle: he who does an act through another, does it himself.
- Principle - agent, master - servant, partners.

**Kinds of Torts?**

- Affecting person: Assault, battery or false imprisonment.
- Affecting reputation:

    - defamation. Libel (addressed to eye and actionable per se), Slander (addressed to the ear and actionable on proof of damage).
    - malicious prosecution
- Affecting immovable property

    - trespass
    - dispossession
    - inury to easements.
- Affecting movable property

    - trespass of goods
    - detention and conversion
- Both person and property

    - negligence, nuisance, fraud

**Defences?**

- _Volenti non-fit injuria (to a willing person, injury is not done)_
- Plaintiff wrongdoer, inevitable, act of god, private defence, mistake (mistake of fact is not a defence), necessity, statutory authority

**Remedies?**

- Damages: Pecuniary compensation
- Specific restitution of property
- Injunction
- Extra Judicial

    - Self help (re-entering the land, ejecting the trespasser)
    - Abatement of nuisance
    - Distress damage feasant (withholding the thing that caused the damage, till the owner compensates for the loss).

  

**Absolute Liability vs Strict Liability**

In a crime of absolute liability a person could be guilty even if there was no intention to commit the crime. Defence on the grounds of _mistake of fact_ is not a defence. Negligence is not required to be proven. e.g owning a pet rattle snake.

  

It's a standard of tort liability. M.C.Mehta vs Union of India case (Oleum Gas Leak Tragedy).

  

  

  

  

  

# Delegated Legislation

When the function of legislation is entrusted to other organs.

  

**Reasons?**

- Pressure upon parliament, technical nature, flexibility.
- Emergency = when quick action required.
- Complexities of modern admin (necessary to give wide powers to authorities)

  

Statue enacted by legislature is Parent Act (Primary Law) and rules, regulations, byelaws, orders etc are known as subordinate laws.

  

Sub-delegation - delegation to another subordinate authority or agency e.g Essential Commodities Act.

- Cannot sub-delegate to officers below a rank specified in the parent act.
- Cannot go beyond the power conferred.
- If some conditions are imposed which must be compiled then those must be fulfilled otherwise becomes ultra vires.

  

Must be published or promulgated in some suitable manner whether such publication is prescribed in parent act or not.

  

**Functions which can be delegated?**

- Commencement of an Act
- Supplying details - Section 3 of AIS (1951) authorises the Govt to make rules to regulate conditions of service in the AIS
- Inclusion & Exclusion - extend the provisions to different territories, persons or commodities.
- Suspension
- Adopt and apply statutes existing in other states.
- Prescribing punishments

    - Legislature must determine maximum punishment
    - The exercise of power must be subject to the previous sanction or subsequent approval.
- Power to frame rules, bye-laws, regulations etc. They must be laid before the legislature.
- Make necessary changes to remove difficulties. Removal of difficulties to modify even the parent act (Henry VIII clause). As a matter of rule it is not allowed.

  

**Functions which cannot be delegated?**

- Essential legislative functions cannot be delegated. Legislative policy must be laid down by the legislature itself.
- Repeal of Law.
- Modify the Act in its important aspects.
- Retrospective operation
- Ouster of jurisdiction of the courts.
- Making of a particular act into an offence is an essential legislative function
- Imposing tax.

  

**Judicial Review**

- Enabling Act is ultra vires the constitution.
- The administrative legislation is ultra vires the constitution.
- The admin legislation is ultra vires the enabling act / conflict / prescribed procedure.
- The DL is in excess of power conferred by the enabling Act.
- Unreasonable, arbitrary and discriminatory.

  

# Prevention of Corruption Act (1988)

Wider definition, expedite the proceedings, enhanced penalties, fruitful provision for prevention of bribery.

  

Corruption = According to the World Bank it is the abuse of public office for private gain.

  

C = M + D - A 

Corruption = Monopoly + Discretion - Accountability.

  

Santhanam Committee Recommendation 1962.

  

**Bribe vs Gratification?**

- Abetment by Public Servants of Offences.
- Obtaining valuable thing without consideration - non bailable, non compoundable.
- Criminal misconduct: accepts or attempts to obtain gratification other than legal remuneration.
- Habitual committing of offence: taking gratification by corrupt means, personal influence.
- Punishment for attempt.

  

**Who can investigate?**

ACP, DSP

In Subramaniam Swamy vs CBI, SC said that CBI can investigate corruption charges against top bureaucrats without government nod.

  

**Other Laws to tackle corruption?**

- IPC, 1860
- Benami Transaction Act, 1988
- The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
- RTI, 2005.

  

**CVC**

- Set up in 1964 on the recommendation of Santhanam committee. 

  

Vineet Narain vs UoI (Jain Hawala Case): statutory status should be given to CVC.

  

**CVC Act 2003**

- Receive written complaints for any allegation or misuse of office and recommend appropriate action.
- CVC + 2 other members.

**Functions and Powers?**

- Exercise superintendence and give directions.
- Inquire, investigate and review.
- Tender advice to the Central Govt.
- It has the powers of a civil court.

**Jurisdiction?**

- AIS and Group A
- Scale V and above in PSB
- Grade D and above in RBI
- E-8 in PSU
- Managers in General Insurance Companies.

  

* * *

**Lokayukta** 

First set up by MH in 1971.

  

  

# CPC

Civil Nature : determination of civil rights. e.g titles, money suits, matrimonial suits, office. Suits of religious honors, dignities or privileges are not suits of civil nature.

  

**Types of jurisdictions:**

1. Territorial : geographical boundaries
2. Pecuniary : amount or value of the case that can be presented
3. Subject Matter

  

**Rules**

1. Every suit in the Court of lowest grade.
2. No court shall entertain a suit unless it has competence to take cognizance of the same.

  

**Place**

1. Immovable Property - where situated, any place if situated in different place.
2. In other cases - defendant actually resides, carries business, cause of action arises

  

**Parties**

1. Plaintiff - one who seeks relief
2. Defendant - against whom suit is filed.

  

**Types of parties**

1. Necessary - no meaningful decision can be arrived in absence. The suit will be rejected on account of being non-joinder
2. Misjoinder - an unncessary party is joined in the suit. The suit does not suffer from misjoinder.

  

**Pleadings**

1. Statements in writing. Filed by each party. All details. **NOT** evidence.
2. Includes Plaint (detailed application by plaintiff in Court) and Written (defendents detailed reply to the plaint)
3. Replication - further pleadings by plaintiff
4. Rejoinder - reply of Defendant to the further pleadings.

**Content of Plaints**

1. Name of Court
2. Particulars of Plaintiff & Defendent
3. Cause of action
4. Relief claimed
5. Signature of Party
6. Verification
7. Affidavit

  

**Written Statement**

1. To be filed within 30 / 90 days
2. Documents relied upon in defence
3. Specific denials
4. Failure to deny specifically causes presumption of admission

  

**Summons**

- The name of court, purpose for which presence is required, date and time of appearance, signature of judge, seal of the court.
- It must be accompanied by copy of plaint
- Service of summon

    - Direct personal service
    - Authorized agent
    - To an adult

        - defendent absent
        - no likelihood of found at his residence
    - Fixing - when family refuses to accept. Fix copy on front door.
    - Registered post, courier service, fax and e-mail approved by court.
    - Substituted Service : where court is satisfied that there is reason to believe that defendent is keeping out of the way to avoid service.

        - affixing copy in Court
        - conspicuous part of the house where the defendent is known to have last resided.
        - publication in the newspaper.
        - beating of drums

**Hearing**

- First hearing issues are framed.
- Hearing when evidence is taken of parties and their witness
- Issues are of 2 kinds - facts & law.

  

**Withdrawal**

- Absolute Withdrawal (w/o courts permission) - courts can't refuse it. Can't bring a fresh suit now.
- Qualified Withdrawal (leave of court) - where suit likely to fail

  

**Compromise**

- Settle the dispute and apply for a Decree.
- Duty of the court to pass the decree in accordance with the compromise.
- Compromise has to be lawful.
- Must be in writing and signed by parties

  

**Abatement**

- Suit becomes redundant due to a person ceasing to exist.
- No abatement if right to sue survives and death after hearing has taken place.
- Substitution of legal representative within 90 days.
- Fresh suit on same cause of action barred.

  

**Interlocutary Orders**

- Reasoned order on party's petition during pendency to provide interim relief.

    - sale of movable property subject to natural decay
    - detention, preservation of matter.

  

**Injunctions**

- It is a judicial remedy prohibiting persons from doing a specified act or commanding them to undo some wrong.

    - Mandatory - directing a party do some act
    - Prohibitive / Preventive - restraining a party from doing an act (most common)
    - Temporary & Permanent - permanent only by a decree made, governed by SRA. Temporary governed by CPC. This is on the condition that plaintiff has a prima facie case, the plaintiff will suffer irreparable loss which cannot be compensated in money terms.

**Receiver**

- Impartial person appointed by the court to manage property under litigation
- Appointment can be made at any stage of the suit - before or after a decree.
- Discretionary power of the court.
- Cannot exercise this power suo-moto

  

**Right to Lodge Caveat**

- To take care.
- Intimation to the proper office or court, to prevent the taking of any step without intimation to the party
- Notice of caveat through registered post.
- Will remain in force for 90 days.

  

**Judgment**

- Statement given by the judge on grounds of decree or order.
- Immediately after completion of hearing or on some future date. Ordinarily within 30 days (not beyond 60 in extraordinary)

  

**Decree**

- Formal expression of adjudication which conclusively determines the right of the parties regarding all or any of the matters in controversy.
- For example, dismissal in case of non-appearance, order to withdraw suit, interlocutary orders, refusing stay are not decrees.
- Execution of decree is the enforcement of the decrees or orders by the process of the court to enable the decree holder to realize the fruits of the judgement.
- Execution is of 2 types: against person and against property.

  

  

  

**IPC (1860)**

  

Extends to the whole of India except J & K. It has 26 chapters and 511 sections. It has been divided into General Principles and Specific Offences Part.

  

**Jurisdiction**

- Intra-territorial: Committed by Indian or foreigner within Indian territory.
- Extra-territorial: Indian committing act outside India, on a ship or aircraft registered in India, targeting a computer resource located in India.

**Offence**

- An act or ommission made punishable by law.

**Crime**

  

Crime = Actus Reus (act or deed) + Mens Rea (guilty mind)

**Stages of Crime**

- Intention: Condition of mind, foresight and desire. Mere intention not punishable. Motive is the ulterior objective. Absense of intention may be a defence but motive not. Motive however pure and laudable will not exonerate.
- Preparation: Mere preparation not punishable. Exceptions include : Preparation to wage war against India (122), Commit depredation on the territory of any power at peace with GoI (126), Commit dacoity (399).
- Attempt

    - Principal offence and attempt are made punishable in same section.
    - Under different sections. Murder (302) and Attempt to Murder (307)
    - Not expressly provided for is covered under Section 511.
- Commission

  

* * *

GENERAL EXCEPTIONS (76-106)

Avoid criminal responsibility. Burden of proof is on the accused as per Sec 105 of IEA.

  

Defence under 2 heads:

- Excusable: Will not be liable as lacks necessary mens rea due to existence of circumstances.

    - Mistake of facts (not law). Was commanded by law to do it. 
    - Incapacity: Infancy (below 7 years, 7 - 12 but immature understanding), Insanity (at the time of the crime, not necessarily before), Intoxication (administered and not voluntarily , voluntarily assumes same knowledge but not same intention)
    - Accidents: without criminal intention, doing of a lawful act / manner / means / care and caution.
- Justifiable: Accused not liable because of the existence of circumstances which justify in doing the act although well knowing that harm will be done.

    - Judicial Act: acts of judge, acts in pursuant to a judgement or court order.
    - Necessity
    - Consent: Not intended or unknown, good faith. Exception: given under fear, misconception of fact, intoxicated person, unsound mind, under 12 years of age, act is itself illegal.
    - Communication in Good Faith
    - Compulsion : Under the threat of instant death. Except murder and offences against the State punishable with death.
    - Trifles: _De minimus non curat lex_ (The law takes no account of trifles). Covers not only accidental but also deliberate acts causing harm.
    - Private Defence: the right is defensive and retributive. Injury inflicted commensurate with threat.

        - own body, body of another person
        - property, against theft, mischief by fire, robbery, criminal trespass and attempts to commit them.
        - against acts of minors, person of unsound mind, intoxicated persons, person under misconception of fact
        - Private defence to body can be used to cause death on apprehension of

            - death, grievous hurt
            - rape, unnatural lust
            - kidnapping, abduction
            - wrongful confinement not having recourse to authorities.
            - throwing or attempting to throw acid (2013 amendment)
        - Defence of property causing death

            - robbery
            - house-breaking at night
            - mischief by fire
            - theft, mischief or house trespass
        - Not available

            - against lawful act.
            - direction of public servant in good faith
            - right to have recourse to the protection of public authorities.

  

  

  

**CrPC**

**Classification of offences?**

- Cognizable and non-cognizable.
- Bailable and non-bailable.
- Compoundable and non-compoundable.
- Offence triable as summons case (not warrant case) and as warrant case (death, life imprison, > 2 years)
- Offence exclusively triable by a court of sessions.

  

**Steps?**

- Investigation: ascertain facts, arrest of offender, collect evidence, form opinion.
- Inquiry: Magistrate or court, determination of truth or falsehood of allegations
- Trial: the judicial process, question of guilt or innocence of the person accused is determined.

    - Basic consideration of fair trial, avoidance of delay and fair procedure.

**How to compel appearance of a person?**

- Summons, Warrant of arrest, Proclamation and Attachment of property.

  

**What are the steps involved in trial?**

  

1. Registration of FIR.
2. Commencement of Investigation and collection of evidence. Accused person can be arrested.
3. Production of accused before magistrate within 24 hours.
4. Bail hearing.
5. Completion of investigation. Chargesheet is filed.
6. Hearing regarding charge. Giving prosecution and accused opportunity of being heard.
7. Discharge if the court feels the charges are groundless.
8. Framing of Charge.
9. Conviction on plea of guilty.
10. Recording of evidence of prosecution. Examination of witness of prosecution by the Defence. Very important stage of trial.
11. Statement of the accused : given an opportunity to put up his case and discard the evidence. Subject to cross examination by prosecution. 
12. Defence Evidence.
13. Argument - both sides make arguments on important points. Can be oral or written.
14. Judgment - acquittal or conviction.

  

  

**Plea bargaining?**

- Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2005.
- For punishment below 7 years.
- At the stage of cognizance of offence by Court.
- The accused should not be previously convicted and compensation should be provided to the victim.
- Punishment is half of the minimum or 1/4th punishment.
- Exceptions: societal crime, women and child related offences.

  

  

  

**The Punishment Under IPC**

**Theories of punishment?**

Deterrance, Preventive, Retributive, Reformative, Expiatory.

1. Deterrance: Cruel and inhuman, threat to others to not commit. Hardened criminals are not afraid, sympathy of public for cruel punishment, excessive harshness defeats the purpose.
2. Preventive Theory: prevent them from committing another crime. Imprisonment. Undesirable effect of hardening first offenders/juvenile.
3. Retributive Theory: Tit for tat / Revenge. An eye for an eye. End in itself rather than a means of achieving social security. Murder will be met by capital punishment and no consideration of circumstance taken. Help satisfy the emotion. 
4. Reformative: Hate the sin and not the sinner. Humane treatment, rehabilitation, correction and readjustment. Replace torturous methods with fine, damages. No death penalty.
5. Expiatory: Punishment for the purification of the offender.

  

Perfect system = combination of all of them.

  

**Forms of punishment under IPC?**

Fine, forfeiture of property, imprisonment, life imprisonment, death penalty.

  

**What determines the extent of punishment?**

Nature of offence, facts and circumstances, age, injury to individual or society, nature of weapons, effect of punishment on offender, correction and reformation of the offender.

  

**Fine?**

Election related offences, obstructing a public way, public nuisance, publication of proposal for lottery.

  

**Forfeiture?**

Absolute not allowed. Specific property allowed, purchase by public servant which is legally prohibited.

  

**Imprisonment?**

Simple, Rigorous and Solitary confinement (not more than 3 months)

  

**Life Imprisonment?**

For whole of life, does not expire after 14 years, rigorous imprisonment and not simple.

  

**Death?**

Special reasons have to stated by the court. Given in rarest of the rare cases.

Waging war against government, abetting mutiny actually committed, murder (302), giving false evidence leading to death, abetment of suicide of minor person, attempt to murder by life convict, dacoity with murder, repeat offenders in case of rape (376 E), death or persistent vegetative state.

  

Special reasons must relate not to the crime but to the criminal.

  

  

  

  

Law of Contract

  

Contract = Agreement + Enforceability

Agreement = Offer + Acceptance

  

Contract: express, implied; oral or written; formalities not required.

  

**Essentials of valid contract**

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Consideration = something for something. Both object and consideration should be lawful. | Capacity: Minor, unsound mind, alien enemy and undischarged insolvent. | Meeting of minds (_Consensus Ad Idem)_ |
| Legality of object | Certainty | Possibility : Impossible acts not valid |
| Intention to create legal rel: informal b/w father & son, husband & wife, social function are not valid. | Free consent : Invalid in case of fraud, misrepresentation, coercion, undue influence | Legal formalities (for certain type) : promisory note stamped, negotiable instrument in writing, contract of sale should be registered. |

**Miscellaneous**

- In case of promise of donation to religious purpose, the money can be reclaimed.
- If a person agrees to sell a car for Rs. 101 then it is a valid contract.
- Contract cannot be enforced in restraint of marriage, trade, legal proceeding.
- Promise to marry someone in written constitutes a valid contract.

**Kinds of Contracts**

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Valid Contract | Voidable Contract : valid but can be invalidated by one party e.g misrepresentation, fraud, coercion, undue influence. |
| Void agreement :<br><br>- opposed to public policy, restraint of trade / marriage / legal proceedings / way of wager (gambling contract).<br>- Does not have consideration, capacity, consensus ad idem, certainty and possiblity.<br>- Collateral can be recovered | Illegal Agreement :<br><br>- Void + Penal element e.g agreement to murder, supply heroin<br>- Collateral cannot be recovered |
| Void Contract : Contract is valid at the time of entering but becomes invalid. It involves subsequent impossibility of failure of object (Frustration).<br><br>- destruction of subject matter<br>- change of circumstances<br>- death, war, govt or legislative intervention | Unenforceable contract : if the problem is with compliance of formality. If defect removed then becomes valid e.g promissory, negotiable instrument. |

**Miscellaneous**

- The difference between void and illegal agreement is that the incidental or collateral transactions of a void agreement is valid, whereas the incidental transactions of illegal agreement are invalid.
- Standard Form Contract : fine-print consumer form contract at point of sale.
- Breach of contract: non-fulfillment of obligations. Consequences would be : damages or compensation, a decree for specific performance and an injunction.
- Terms of the contract should be reasonable.
- Contract can be invalidated on account of being intoxicated. This is in contrast to the IPC related cases.
- In case a person becomes discharged then creditors can't claim over his subsequent income.

  

  

  

Law of Evidence

Indian Evidence Act (1872) tells us about: facts-in-issue, relevant facts, admissable facts, facts may be proved / disproved, who is to produce such evidence and how it is given. It is applicable before court. Not applicable in case of Administrative Tribunal, Arbitrators, Lok Adalat, Court Martial, Departmental Disciplinary Proceedings. 

  

**Witness?**

- A child aged 4 years is a wtiness.
- An accused cannot be compelled to be witness but he is a competent witness.
- Hostile witness is admissable but not given credence.
- Police officer is a competent witness.
- Relative / rival / enemy can be witness but given low priority.
- Wife cannot be compelled to disclose information made by spouse. Even if communication made by spouse is revealed voluntarily it cannot be taken on record by the court.

  

Evidence is a means and proof ends. It does not include arguments, opinions of witnesses. Principle governing burden of evidence is different in case of civil and criminal cases.

  

**Confession vs Admission**

Confession is acknowledgement of total guilt whereas admission is a statement of fact that tend towards proving guilt. They are not conclusive proof of the matter. Admission is used in civil matters whereas confession is used in criminal matters.

  

**Miscellaneous**

- Statements made under narco analysis and polygraph is not admissable in evidence.
- In Civil Cases the burden of proof on both the parties, in criminal cases it is on the prosecution.
- Evidence is inadmissable if it obtained through illegal means.
- Leading questions have answers in YES or NO. They cannot be asked during Chief examination.
- Expert opinion is evidence.

  

**Dying declaration**

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| English Law | Indian Law |
| made after cause of death arisen | \-do- |
| expectation of death | \-do- |
| maker believes that he would die | need not believe that he would die e.g Pakala Narayana Swamy vs Emperor (1937) case. |

**Methods of examination**

- Chief - Public Prosecutor
- Cross - Defence Counsel
- Re-exam - PP
- Re-cross - DC

  

**Categories of Evidence**

1. Real & Personal
- Real - producing person / cloth
- Personal

    - Oral

        - Given in court by witness (outside court not allowed)
        - Evidence given from personal knowledge (signs / gestures)
    - Documentary

        - Primary : original document
        - Secondary: as a matter of rule not admissable

3. Direct & Circumstantial
4. Original & Hearsay. Hearsay not admissable except dying declaration, confession, admission.
5. Substantive (even 1 item enough to give judgment) & Corroborative (even 10 items can't form the basis of judgment)

  

  

**IPR**

**What does IPR mean?**

**I -** skills

**P -** person has exclusive right

**R -** standard of permitted action by law.

  

**What are the forms of IPR?**

Patent, copyright, trademark, GI, Integ circ, indust des, trade secrets.

  

**Laws that regulate IPR regime in India?**

Patent (1970), Copyright (1957), Trade Marks (1999), Design Act (2001), Biological Div (2002)

  

**When is invention patentable?**

New, useful, not obvious, pertains to patentable subject matter, grant of patent is not barred.

  

**Copyright?**

Exclusive and assignable, given for a fixed number of years, To print, publish, perform, film artistic or muscial material (literary work, musical work, cinematograph, sound recording, photograph, computer work).

Time limit for copyright is 60 years.

  

**Trademarks?**

sign, words, drawing, pictures, shape of goods.

  

**Industrial Designs?**

Features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament of composition of lines or colours applied to any article. The design must be applied to article, through an industrial process.

  

**Integrated Circuits?**

Valid for 10 years.

  

**Geographical Indicators?**

Identifies any goods as originating in a country or territory where a given quality, reputation or other char is essentially attributable to their geographic origin. Kolhapuri Chappal, Assam Black Tea.

  

A group right and not individual.

  

**Protection of undisclosed information?**

Under law of tort, recipient uses the information for own purposes e.g customers list, secret recipes. 

  

  

**Cyber Laws**

More devices than people. By 2020 there will be 50 billion devices. Industrial economy to knowledge economy.

  

3 problems:

Borderless nature: no connection with physical address,  anonymity, nature of information.

  

Challenges of:

Ownership, freedom of expression, liability.

  

Advantages:

Anonymity, no immediate physical risk, lag between action and detention, legitimate tools, prevention expensive.

  

Legal recognition of contracts through electronic means etc. Protection of personal data, consumer protection, intellectual property.

  

Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and IT Act, 2000.

- Law applicable to any kind of information.
- Technology neutral.
- Enabling: use of electronic records & digital signatures.
- Facilitating: it facilitates e-gov & e-comm
- Regulatory: imposes civil and criminal sanction
- Accepts Digital Signatures.
- Cyber security and terrorism.
- Electronic surveillance, blocking & monitoring.
- Cyber Appellate Tribunal

  

Features

- Does not take citizenship into account.
- Section 67: Obscene information.
- Shreya Singhal vs Union of India.
- Section 66: computer related offences, identity theft, cheating by impersonation, cyber terrorism.
- Section 43: Civil offences; unauthorised access, downloading, copying or extracting, denial of access

  

Cyber crimes comprises of cyber contravention and cyber offences.

  

  

  

**Dowry Prohibition Act**

Dowry Prohibition Act of 1961.

  

The amended definition after Satya Rani Chadha case. Property or valuable security given at or before or any time after the marriage.

  

**Punishments**

- Taking of dowry : Punishment not less than 5 years + fine not less than Rs. 15000 or dowry amount. Not applicable in cases of presents arising out of customary nature.
- Demand of dowry: Punishment 6 months to 2 years + fine of Rs. 10000
- The burden of proof on accused.
- Not cognizable, non compoundable and non bailable.
- Cognizance on basis of police report, complaint. May not be taken if unnecessary delay.
- Appointment of Dowry Prohibition Officers under Section 8(B)

  

**Section 304 (B) of IPC**

- Offence of dowry death.
- Within 7 years of marriage and in connection with demand for dowry.

  

**Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.**

**Section 498(A) of IPC**

- Punishment upto 3 years + fine
- Husband + relative of husband
- Cognizable + non-compoundable + non-bailable

It has been called as Legal Terrorism by SC.

  

  

  

**Sexual Harassment At Workplace**

**What is Sexual Harassment?**

- Unwelcome sexually determined behaviour - physical contact and advances, demand or request for sexual favours, sexually colored remarks, showing porn.
- Constitutes violation of FR 14, 15, 19 and 21.
- Commenting on personal appearance, comments with sexual overtones, unnecessary touching, staring, teasing by using names, obscene phone calls, taking pictures without permission, stalking, unncessary calling to cabin, organizing out of station tours, inappropriate messages, reading aloud news, character assassination and misogynist comment.

  

SC judgement in Vishakha was legally binding and enforcing.

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| 509 | Eve Teasing |
| 354 | A : sexual har, B : assault, C : voyerims, D : stalking |
| 366 | Kidnapping or abducting |
| 376 | D: Gang Rape, E: repeat offenders with death |

  

  

**Applicability**

To Govt, Private and Public Sector.

  

**What should be done?**

- Prevent and deter the committing of any act.
- Issue express prohibitions of sexual harassment at workplace to be published and circulated.
- Provide for effective complaint procedure and remedies including compensation.
- Form a complaint committee. Rs. 50,000 fine for not doing so.
- CC to be headed by women, half members should be women and including a NGO.
- Women employees should have access to committee.
- Ensure that women employee is not victimized.
- Take all complaints seriously, ensure access to counselling facilities.

  

**Complaint Procedure?**

- Complaints referred -> inquiry within 90 days --> report with recommendations to the head of the org --> the head confirms the penalty with or without modification within 60 days.
- Initiate proper disciplinary action.
- Lodge police complaint under IPC section 354 and 509.
- Regular review of the functioning of the committee to be done.
- May seek transfer of the accused or own self.

  

  

**ADR**

**Meaning?**

The process of resolving disputes in place of litigation and includes arbitration, mediation, conciliation and Judicial settlements through Lok Adalats.

  

- National Legal Mission to reduce average pendency time from 15 years to 3 years.
- Article 39 (A) - provide free legal aid and Article 14 and 22 (1) ensures equality before law.
- To ensure that justice is not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disability.
- Statutory recognition under : CPC, Arbitration and Conciliation Act (1996), Legal Services Authorities Act (2002)

  

**Advantage**

- Alternative to the Formal Legal System.
- Any time, reduce the number of issues.
- Expeditious and less cost.
- Promote creative and realistic business solutions.
- Not governed by rigorous rules and procedure.
- With or without lawyer.
- Reduction of work load on courts.
- Win - win situation.
- No appeal lies - reduces the work of appellate courts.

  

**Section 89 of CPC**

- Provides for Arbitration, Conciliation, Judicial Settlement and Mediation.
- Reference is by mutual consent.
- Court should reformulate the terms of settlement. Judicial settlement by another judge.
- Time for ADR - a week to two months.

  

**Legal Services Authorities Act**

- Free legal services to the weaker sections of the society.
- Organize Permanent Lok Adalats
- Promote justice on the basis of equal opportunity.
- Section 12 enables : member of a SC / ST, trafficking, woman or child, mentally ill, industrial workman
- There is National Legal Services Authority, State, District and Taluk level.

  

**Arbitration**

- Neutral 3rd party renders decision.
- All disputes of civil or quasi civil nature can be referred e.g Property, right to hold office, non fulfilment of clause of contract, disputes in partnership (CPOP)
- Arbitration agreement --> court referral to arbitration --> appointment of arbitrator --> submission of statement --> proceedings --> arbitral award.

  

**Conciliation**

- Adjustment and settlement of disputes in friendly manner.
- The proceedings starts when one party makes a written request to other. The other party must accept the request within 30 days.
- Contractual, matrimonial, breach of contract, commerical disputes and all disputes arising out of legal relationship.
- Reduce the extent of differences and to arrive at amicable settlement.
- There is no agreement for arbitration. The conciliator only brings parties together and tries to solve the dispute. He has no authority to give any award.
- There may be a written settlement agreement. If the settlement agreement is signed by both the parties and conciliator then it has the same status and effect as arbitral award.

  

**Mediation**

- Half way between conciliation and arbitration.
- Assist the parties reach their own negotiated settlement and may make suggestions as appropriate.
- Identify matters of concern, develop better understanding of situation, develop mutually acceptable proposals.
- Has no power to decide.
- Conciliator can make proposals for settlements, formulate, reformulate the terms while mediator merely facilitate a settlement between parties.

  

  

**Civil Legal Remedies**

_Ubi jus ibi remedium -_ (There is no wrong without remedy).

  

Specific Relief Act

- A particular relief to which a person is entitled in the first instance as distinguished from compensatory relief.
- It's available only for the purpose of enforcing individual civil rights and not for penal law.

  

Objectives

- Claim compensation
- Claim damages
- Injunction
- Declaratory Relief

  

Reliefs Available

- Restoration of possession. Immovable property. In case of dispossessions. Recovery of specific movable property.
- Specific performance of Contracts (non fulfillment = damages). Rule of Equity i.e enforce whole contract. Exceptions exist when the part unperformed is small and it is compensated. Contracts cannot be enforced when the compensation in money is adequate, involves personal service, under arbitration or supervision of the court.
- Injunction: Order by which individual is required to perform, or is restrained from performing a particular act.

    - Preliminary or temporary injuctions.
    - Preventive injunctions - status quo.
    - Mandatory injunctions - specific performance.
    - Permanent injunctions - pollution / blasting.
- Declatory Relief : Declaration of status or right. Parties not clear about rights or duties. Rectification of instruments (mutual mistake of the parties), rescission (undoing of a thing, ab initio), cancellation of instruments (cancel void or voidable contract).

  

**Non - enforceability**

- Not entitled to recover compensation.
- Incapable of performing contracts.
- Not ready and willing to perform the contract.

  

  

# Civil & Criminal Courts

Substantive Law : define the rights, duties and liabilities e.g IPC, Law of Contracts etc.

Procedural Law : define the pleading and procedure by which substantive laws are applied. CrPC

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| SC  | Any sentence |
| HC  | Any sentence |
| Session Judge / Additional Session Judge | Any sentence (death sentence is subject to confirmation by HC) |
| Assistant Sessions Judge | Imprisonment upto 10 years / fine |
| CJM / CMM | Imprisonment upto 7 years / fine (Rs. 10000) |
| JM (I) / MM | Imprisonment upto 3 years / fine (Rs. 10000) |
| JM (II) / SMM | Imprisonment upto 1 year / fine (Rs. 5000) |

  

**Hiearchy of criminal courts**

Session Courts (Session Judge, Additional Sessions Judge)

- Assistant Session Judge
- Chief Metropolitan Magistrate

    - Additional Chief Metro Magistrate

        - MM
        - Special MM

- Chief Judicial Magistrate

    - Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate

        - JM (I)
        - SJM (I)
        - JM (II)
        - SJM (II)

**Hierarcy of Civil Courts**

Cities

- First Grade (Chief Judge, Additional CJ)
- Second Grade (Assistant CJ)
- Third Grade (Munsif or Junior Civil Judge)

Districts

- District Judge and Additional DJ
- Assistant DJ
- Munsif or Junior Civil Judge

  

  

# PNJ

**Meaning**

- Procedural fairness. American counterpart of due process. Procedure should be just, fair and reasonable.
- Applies to Judicial, Quasi-judicial and Administrative Actions
- Not codified, supplements the law and not supplants it.

  

**2 Fundamental Principles**

- _Nemo Judex in Re Sua -_ No one should be a judge in his own cause.

    - Free from bias - whether a reasonable man in posession of relevant information would have thought that bias is likely

        - Personal Bias
        - Pecuniary Bias
        - Subject Matter Bias
    - Reasonable suspicion / likelihood of bias.
- _Audi Alteram Partem -_ No one should be condemned unheard. Due notice and reasonable opportunity of being heard.

  

**Subsidiary Principles**

- Justice must not only be done but manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.
- Orders passed must be speaking orders.
- One who decides must also hear.

  

**Exceptions**

- Emergency : Illegal building
- Confidentiality : Police diary
- Impracticability : Mass copying
- Expediency / Necessity
- Interim Preventive Action
- Legislative Actions : Legislature can exclude PNJ from the act

  

  

# Crime and Civil Wrong

Wrongs include wrong declared by law as well as rights infringed. An act or omission which is not a wrong may be made so by the law.

  

In case of conspiracy mere intention is enough for crime.

  

A civil wrong is an infringement of the legal right of an individual (group / association) which does not affect the society in general and is redressable by monetary compensation.

  

The distinction between civil and criminal wrongs depends on the nature of the remedy provided by the law. A civil proceedings concerns with the enforcement of some right claimed by the plaintiff as against the defendant whereas criminal proceedings have for their object the punishment of the accused for some act of which he is accused.

  

Civil cases are compromisable where criminal cases are generally not. In case of non-compoundable offence a compromise between the accused and the individual victim is illegal.

  

In cognizable offence, the state is party in all cases. FIR is mandatory

  

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Cognizable / Bailable | 3 years |
| Summons / Warrant | 2 years |

  

  

  

# Administration of Justice

Means exercise of judicial power to maintain / uphold rights and punish wrongs.

- Civil Justice : concerned with enforcement of rights. Redress in civil cases = compensation
- Criminal Justice : aims at punishment of the offenders. Redress = no relief to the victim. punishment to criminal.

  

**Principles**

- 100 guilty persons can be let free but no innocent shall be punished.
- The accused is presumed to be innocent till the guilt is proved.
- The burden of the proof is on the prosecution
- The accused must be given a Benefit of Doubt.
- Civil Cases = preponderance of probabilities. Criminal = prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt
- Punishment shall reform the offender

  

  

# Legal Right / Duty

**Legal Right**

Every legal right has 5 characteristics:

1. A person of inherence: Owner of the right / entitled to rights. The owner may be a person, indeterminate body (society)
2. A person of incidence: Operates against some person who is under a duty to obey or respect that right.
3. An obligation to do or not to do something: The content of the legal right may be an ACT or an OMISSION Right to receive goods.
4. Object of the right: The right must relate to something e.g tangible (right to property) and intangible (right to good will)
5. Title: Title signifies the source of the legal right i.e how the owner of the right became the owner e.g Citizenship, FR, Inheritance

**Duty**

1. Obligatory act. It is an act opposite of which would be wrong. Duties and wrongs are correlatives.
2. Positive duty and negative duty. When the law obliges us to do the act then it is a positive duty and when forbears from doing an act the duty is negative.
3. Primary & Secondary Duty : exist per se indpendent of any other duty e.g forbear from causing harm. A secondary duty has no independent existence but exists for enforcement of other duties e.g duty to pay a man damages for the injury (remedial duty)
4. Absolute and Relative Duties: Owed only to the State, breach is a crime and remedy is punishment. Relative owed to a person. Breach is a civil injury and remedy is compensation.

  

**Types of Rights**

1. Positive & Negative
- Corresponds to positive duty. Scope is to receive positive benefit. Similarly negative right corresponds to negative duty.
- In any society the number of negative rights are more than positive rights.
3. Proprietary & Personal
- Proprietary means a person's right in relation to his own property, estate or assets.
- Personal is right in relation to a person's status e.g right to reputation, freedom of speech. Corresponding to personal right is a personal duty.
- Prop rights can be valued in terms of money and personal cannot.
5. Inheritable & Uninheritable
- Prop rights are inheritable
- Personal rights are uniheritable. They extinguish with the death of the owner of the right.
7. Rights in _rem_ and Rights in _personam_
- _Rem_ available against the whole world e.g Right to my money
- _Personam_ available against a particular person (group of person). Arises due to contract
- Rights in _personam_ are positive in nature.
9. Principal & Accessory
- Principal is the main right vested in a person.
- Accessory is the secondary, subordinate right which arises out of principal right e.g The right of landlord to the land owned is a principal right whereas the right to enjoy rents is an accessory right.
11. General Rights & Special Rights
- Propounded by H.L.A Hart in 1955. General rights are possessed by all members of society e.g the right to vote in election.
- Special rights arise out of special transaction between specific individuals from special relationship e.g contract, the right to withdraw money from bank

  

  

# Maintenance of Parents and Senior Citizens

Criminal Procedure Cod, 1973 Section 25.

  

**What are provisions under CrPC?**

1. Sufficient means, neglects / refuses, father or mother
2. Magistrate of 1st class, can order the person to make a monthly allowance as deemed fit.
3. Interim maintenance during pendency, application to be disposed within 60 days.
4. Non compliant will lead to issue of warrant for levying amount. Imprisonment for 1 month.

  

**Why new Act?**

1. Senior citizen including parent / grandparent and childless senior citizen.
2. Against one or more of his children not being a minor. Childless senior citizen who is not a minor and is in a possession or would inherit the property.

  

**Procedure?**

1. The senior citizen herself.
2. Organisation on his behalf.
3. Suo motto.
4. Where the applicant last resided or where the children or relative resides.
5. Tribunal (a civil court deemed), presided over by not less than SDO, follow summary procedure
6. Maximum maintenance cannot exceed Rs. 10000 per month.

  

**Miscellaneous**

- Transfer of property to be void if taken by deceit and not maintainance.
- Abandoning senior citizen would lead to imprisonment upto 3 years and fine of Rs. 5000 or both.
- The offences under this act are cognizable and bailable.
- Jurisdiction of civil courts is banned.
- Parent has the right to claim from anybody capable of paying (not minor)

  

  

  

# Society Registration Act

**Objectives**

- Improve the legal condition of the society.
- Registration of the literary, scientific and charitable societies, NGO.

  

**Societies that can be registered**

- Charitable societies, promotion of science, literature, fine arts.
- diffusion of useful knowledge.
- foundation or maintenance of libraries, public museum
- galleries or paintings.

  

**How can a society be formed?**

- 7 or more persons. MoA to Registrar of Joint-stock companies.

    - name of society
    - registered office clause
    - object
    - general body member clause: names, adddresses, occupation
    - A copy of the rules and regulations should be filed with MoA.

        - Membership, Subscription, Meeting, Auditor, Legal procedure, dissolution

- Cooperative society requires 10 or more members to Registrar of Coop Soc

  

**Documents Required**

- Covering letter.
- MoA and Rules & Regulations
- Table containing names, addresses and occupation of all members.
- minutes of meetings.
- copy of passed resolution
- declaration by the president of the society
- address proof

  

Society is a separate legal identity. It can sue and can be sued.

  

**How can a society be dissolved?**

- 3/5 th member can decide to dissolve the society.
- settlement of the property of the society, claims and liabilities according to the rules.
- Consent of the govt if it is interested in society.

  

**How can a member be expelled?**

- Once admitted a member shall continue.
- Subscription is in arrears for more than 3 months = not entitled to vote or to be counted as member.

  

**Who all are there in Governing Body?**

- Governors, Council, Directors, Committee, Trustees

  

# Contempt of Court

- Contempt of Court Act, 1971
- CrPC, 1973
- Article 19(2) - nothing ........ in relation to the contempt of court.

  

**Types of contempt?**

Civil

- Wilful disobedience of judgement, decree, order, writ, direction.
- Wilful breach of undertaking given to the court.

Criminal

- Publication of matter which scandalize the authority of court
- Prejudices / interferes with judicial proceedings
- Interferes with admin of justice in any other manner.

**Exceptions?**

- Innocent publications
- Does not relate to the proceeding pending or in good faith.
- Fair report & criticism.
- Incamera proceedings.

  

**Procedure?**

- Inform the contemnor in writing of charge.
- Opportunity to defend.
- Take evidence.
- Action by own motion in case of criminal contempt of SC & HC. Motion by A.G.
- In case of Subordinate Court: Reference by Subordinate court + motion made by Advocate General.

  

**Appeals?**

- Right of appeal.
- Bench (30 days) -> SC (60 days)
- Punishment suspended while appeal is pending.

  

Court can take cognizance only within 1 year of contempt.

  

**Punishment?**

- Simple imprisonment upto 6 months / fine of Rs. 2000. Provided apology can be considered.
- Court shall not impose sentence unless satisfied that contempt substantially interferes with the justice and it was in public interest 

  

# Police and Prison Act

Original act of 1861. New Police Act drafted in 2006.

  

**Police Reforms**

National Police Commission (1977-81) proposed a Model Police Act. In 1996 Prakash Singh filed a PIL in SC for taking cognizance of NPC.

Ribeiro Committee set up in 1998.

Committee under K. Padmanabhaiah in 2000.

Soli Sorabjee Comm drafted Police Act in 2006.

  

**Key Points by SC**

- Creation of buffer body between police and govt.
- Enhance accountability of police.
- Not to be transferred frequently.
- Lessen the control of state govt over police.
- State Level Commisssion for policies.
- Police Establishment Board - for selection, promotions etc.

  

**Draft Act**

- Need for Professional Police Service: Efficient, effective, responsive to people and accountable to law.
- Functional autonomy.
- Accountability - performance evaluation. Accountability Comm at district and state level. Forward complaints of serious misconduct, monitor the status of dept enquiries.
- Improved service conditions, regulating working hours.
- Role in internal security, organized crime, insurgency.
- Core vs non core functions.
- Separate system for Metropolitan areas and non metropolitan areas.
- Misconduct by Police: death in custody, rape, arrest or detention without due process of law.
- Separate investigation from normal functioning of police.
- Forensic labs.
- From a Force to Service... Rough to Smart.
- Rights of Complainants:Lodge complaint relating to misconduct. Right to be informed of progress of enquiry, may attend hearing.
- Friendly police stations: Separate women and child desks.
- Emergency Response Team
- Community Liasion Group, Community Participation and Citizen Policing Committee.
- Village Guard

  

  

* * *

**Prison Act** **(1894)**

  

We are seeing a transition: Human Rights, Civil Society, Legal Awareness, Rule of Law.

  

  

  

# Arrest, Bail, Search

**Meaning?**

Arrest: seize by legal authority and take into custody.

Bail: temporary release awaiting trial, condition of money to guarantee appearance in court.

  

_Bail is law, jail is exception._

Section 40: a thing punishable by law.

  

Non-bailable offence: Court has discretion to give bail or not. Bail cannot be given for an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, previously convicted.

  

**Cognizable offence?**

A criminal offence in which police is empowered to register an FIR, investigate and arrest an accused without a court issued warrant.

  

**Compoundable Offence.**

In which some kind of settlement is permissable e.g voluntarily causing hurt (323), the person to whom hurt is caused.

There are offences which are compoundable by the permissable of Court.

  

**Warrant of Arrest**

1. Bailable, non bailable.
2. Written, signed by magistrate.
3. Addressed to a police officer.
4. Name of accused, offence charged with, remain in force till executed / cancelled.

  

**Arrest without Warrant**

1. In case of cognizable offence, proclaimed offender, suspect of stolen property, obstructs a police officer, unncessary delay may defeat arrest.

  

**Arrest by private person**

1. In his presence commits non-bailable and cognizable offence.
2. Proclaimed offender.

  

**Arrest by Magistrate**

1. Himself arrest, order any person to arrest
2. Legal detention within 24 hours.