---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# IPC (1860), CrPC, Punishment

[http://www.lawyersclubindia.com/articles/Procedure-for-Criminal-Trial--529.asp#.VmuiRfl97IV](http://www.lawyersclubindia.com/articles/Procedure-for-Criminal-Trial--529.asp#.VmuiRfl97IV)

  

**IPC (1860)**

  

Extends to the whole of India except J & K. It has 26 chapters and 511 sections. It has been divided into General Principles and Specific Offences Part.

  

**Jurisdiction**

- Intra-territorial: Committed by Indian or foreigner within Indian territory.
- Extra-territorial: Indian committing act outside India, on a ship or aircraft registered in India, targeting a computer resource located in India.

**Offence**

- An act or ommission made punishable by law.

**Crime**

  

Crime = Actus Reus (act or deed) + Mens Rea (guilty mind)

**Stages of Crime**

- Intention: Condition of mind, foresight and desire. Mere intention not punishable. Motive is the ulterior objective. Absense of intention may be a defence but motive not. Motive however pure and laudable will not exonerate.
- Preparation: Mere preparation not punishable. Exceptions include : Preparation to wage war against India (122), Commit depredation on the territory of any power at peace with GoI (126), Commit dacoity (399).
- Attempt

    - Principal offence and attempt are made punishable in same section.
    - Under different sections. Murder (302) and Attempt to Murder (307)
    - Not expressly provided for is covered under Section 511.
- Commission

  

* * *

GENERAL EXCEPTIONS (76-106)

Avoid criminal responsibility. Burden of proof is on the accused as per Sec 105 of IEA.

  

Defence under 2 heads:

- Excusable: Will not be liable as lacks necessary mens rea due to existence of circumstances.

    - Mistake of facts (not law). Was commanded by law to do it. 
    - Incapacity: Infancy (below 7 years, 7 - 12 but immature understanding), Insanity (at the time of the crime, not necessarily before), Intoxication (administered and not voluntarily , voluntarily assumes same knowledge but not same intention)
    - Accidents: without criminal intention, doing of a lawful act / manner / means / care and caution.
- Justifiable: Accused not liable because of the existence of circumstances which justify in doing the act although well knowing that harm will be done.

    - Judicial Act: acts of judge, acts in pursuant to a judgement or court order.
    - Necessity
    - Consent: Not intended or unknown, good faith. Exception: given under fear, misconception of fact, intoxicated person, unsound mind, under 12 years of age, act is itself illegal.
    - Communication in Good Faith
    - Compulsion : Under the threat of instant death. Except murder and offences against the State punishable with death.
    - Trifles: _De minimus non curat lex_ (The law takes no account of trifles). Covers not only accidental but also deliberate acts causing harm.
    - Private Defence: the right is defensive and retributive. Injury inflicted commensurate with threat.

        - own body, body of another person
        - property, against theft, mischief by fire, robbery, criminal trespass and attempts to commit them.
        - against acts of minors, person of unsound mind, intoxicated persons, person under misconception of fact
        - Private defence to body can be used to cause death on apprehension of

            - death, grievous hurt
            - rape, unnatural lust
            - kidnapping, abduction
            - wrongful confinement not having recourse to authorities.
            - throwing or attempting to throw acid (2013 amendment)
        - Defence of property causing death

            - robbery
            - house-breaking at night
            - mischief by fire
            - theft, mischief or house trespass
        - Not available

            - against lawful act.
            - direction of public servant in good faith
            - right to have recourse to the protection of public authorities.

  

  

  

**CrPC**

**Classification of offences?**

- Cognizable and non-cognizable.
- Bailable and non-bailable.
- Compoundable and non-compoundable.
- Offence triable as summons case (not warrant case) and as warrant case (death, life imprison, > 2 years)
- Offence exclusively triable by a court of sessions.

  

**Steps?**

- Investigation: ascertain facts, arrest of offender, collect evidence, form opinion.
- Inquiry: Magistrate or court, determination of truth or falsehood of allegations
- Trial: the judicial process, question of guilt or innocence of the person accused is determined.

    - Basic consideration of fair trial, avoidance of delay and fair procedure.

**How to compel appearance of a person?**

- Summons, Warrant of arrest, Proclamation and Attachment of property.

  

**What are the steps involved in trial?**

  

1. Registration of FIR.
2. Commencement of Investigation and collection of evidence. Accused person can be arrested.
3. Production of accused before magistrate within 24 hours.
4. Bail hearing.
5. Completion of investigation. Chargesheet is filed.
6. Hearing regarding charge. Giving prosecution and accused opportunity of being heard.
7. Discharge if the court feels the charges are groundless.
8. Framing of Charge.
9. Conviction on plea of guilty.
10. Recording of evidence of prosecution. Examination of witness of prosecution by the Defence. Very important stage of trial.
11. Statement of the accused : given an opportunity to put up his case and discard the evidence. Subject to cross examination by prosecution. 
12. Defence Evidence.
13. Argument - both sides make arguments on important points. Can be oral or written.
14. Judgment - acquittal or conviction.

  

  

**Plea bargaining?**

- Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2005.
- For punishment below 7 years.
- At the stage of cognizance of offence by Court.
- The accused should not be previously convicted and compensation should be provided to the victim.
- Punishment is half of the minimum or 1/4th punishment.
- Exceptions: societal crime, women and child related offences.

  

  

  

**The Punishment Under IPC**

**Theories of punishment?**

Deterrance, Preventive, Retributive, Reformative, Expiatory.

1. Deterrance: Cruel and inhuman, threat to others to not commit. Hardened criminals are not afraid, sympathy of public for cruel punishment, excessive harshness defeats the purpose.
2. Preventive Theory: prevent them from committing another crime. Imprisonment. Undesirable effect of hardening first offenders/juvenile.
3. Retributive Theory: Tit for tat / Revenge. An eye for an eye. End in itself rather than a means of achieving social security. Murder will be met by capital punishment and no consideration of circumstance taken. Help satisfy the emotion. 
4. Reformative: Hate the sin and not the sinner. Humane treatment, rehabilitation, correction and readjustment. Replace torturous methods with fine, damages. No death penalty.
5. Expiatory: Punishment for the purification of the offender.

  

Perfect system = combination of all of them.

  

**Forms of punishment under IPC?**

Fine, forfeiture of property, imprisonment, life imprisonment, death penalty.

  

**What determines the extent of punishment?**

Nature of offence, facts and circumstances, age, injury to individual or society, nature of weapons, effect of punishment on offender, correction and reformation of the offender.

  

**Fine?**

Election related offences, obstructing a public way, public nuisance, publication of proposal for lottery.

  

**Forfeiture?**

Absolute not allowed. Specific property allowed, purchase by public servant which is legally prohibited.

  

**Imprisonment?**

Simple, Rigorous and Solitary confinement (not more than 3 months)

  

**Life Imprisonment?**

For whole of life, does not expire after 14 years, rigorous imprisonment and not simple.

  

**Death?**

Special reasons have to stated by the court. Given in rarest of the rare cases.

Waging war against government, abetting mutiny actually committed, murder (302), giving false evidence leading to death, abetment of suicide of minor person, attempt to murder by life convict, dacoity with murder, repeat offenders in case of rape (376 E), death or persistent vegetative state.

  

Special reasons must relate not to the crime but to the criminal.