# 48 Laws of Power

# Law 1

**Never Outshine Your Master**

Make your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain the heights of power.

  

All masters want to appear more brilliant than other people. Instead of insecurity you must give him glory.

Everyone has insecurities. Outshining the master is perhaps the biggest mistake.

  

Never take your positions for granted. First you must flatter and puff your master.

Discreet flattery is much more effective.

Make him appear more intelligent than you. Act naive. Make him seem more intelligent than you.

He must appear as the sun around which everyone revolves, radiating power and brilliance, the center of attention.

  

If your superios is a falling star, there is nothing to fear from outshining him.

  

**Law - 2**

**Never put too much trust in friends, learn how to use enemies**

Nobody believes that a friend can betray.

_Lord protect me from my friends, I can take care of my enemies._

A Chinese proverb compares friends to the jaws and teeth of a dangerous animal, if you are not careful then you will find them chewing you up

  

A man suddenly spared the guillotine is a grateful man indeed, and will go to the ends of the earth for the man who has pardoned him.

  

Thus it is plain that faults that are evident to the senses, gross and corporal, or otherwise notorious to the world, we know by our enemies sooner than by our friends and familiars.

  

Without enemies around us, we grow lazy

  

**Law - 3**

**Conceal your intentions**

Keep people off balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions.

  

Hide your intentions not by closing up but by talking endlessly about your desires and goals - just not your real ones.  You will kill three birds with one stone: You appear friendly, open and trusting, you conceal your intentions and you send your rivals on time consuming wild goose chase.

  

They cultivate an air of honesty in one area to disguise their dishonesty in others. Honesty is just another decoy in their arsenal of weapons.

  

**Law - 4**

**Always say less than necessary**

- The more you say, the more common you appear, and the less in control.
- Powerful people impress and intimidate by saying less.
- Power is in many ways a game of appearances, and when you say less than necessary, you inevitably appear greater and more powerful than you are. Your silence will make other people uncomfortable. Humans are machines of interpretation and explanation; they have to know what you are thinking. When you carefully control what you reveal, they cannot pierce your intentions or your meaning.
- Once the words are out, you cannot take them back. Keep them under control. Be particularly careful with sarcasm: The momentary satisfaction you gain with your biting words will be outweighed by the price you pay.

  

**Law - 5**

**So much depends on reputation. Guard it with your life**

Reputation is the cornerstone of power. Make your reputation unassailable. Learn to destroy your enemies by opening holes in their own reputations.

  

In the beginning you must work to establish a reputation for one outstanding quality.

  

Your reputation invariably precedes you.

  

**Law - 6**

**Court attention at all cost**

Everything is judged by its appearance, what is unseen counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in the crowd, then, or buried in oblivion. _Stand Out._ Be conspicuous, at all cost. Make yourself a magnet of attention by appearing larger, more colorful, more mysterious than the bland and timid masses.

  

You have to learn to attract attention.

### Create an air of mystery

Do not show all your cards

People are enthralled by mystery, because it invites constant interpretation, they never tire of it.

  

## Law - 7

### Get others to do the work for you, but always take the credit

In the end your helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembered.

  

_Never do yourself what others can do for you._

Second, learn to take advantage of other people’s work to further your own cause. Time is precious and life is short. If you try to do it all on your own, you run yourself ragged, waste energy, and burn yourself out. It is far better to conserve your forces, pounce on the work others have done, and find a way to make it your own.

  

## Law - 8

### Make other people come to you

Aggressive person is rarely in full control. He cannot see more than a couple of moves ahead. Why am I always having to react to events instead of directing them ?

You have mistaken aggressive action for effective action. Most effective action is to stay back, keep calm, and let others be frustrated by the traps you lay for them, playing for long term power rather than quick victory.

  

Two things must happen to place you in this position: You yourself must learn to master your emotions, and never to be influenced by anger; meanwhile, however, you must play on people’s natural tendency to react angrily when pushed and baited. In the long run, the ability to make others come to you is a weapon far more powerful than any tool of aggression.

  

For negotiations or meetings, it is always wise to lure others into your territory, or the territory of your choice.

You have your bearings, while they see nothing familiar and are subtly

placed on the defensive.

  

## Law - 9

### Win through your actions, never through argument

Any momentary triumph you think you have gained through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: the resentment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change of opinion. It is much more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate, do not explicate.

  

Words have that insidious ability to be interpreted according to the other person’s mood and insecurities. Even the best argument has no solid foundation, for we have all come to distrust the slippery nature of words. And days after agreeing with someone, we often revert to our old opinion out of sheer habit.

  

  

_Truth is generally seen, rarely heard._

## Law - 10

### Avoid the unhappy and unlucky

You may feel you are helping the drowning man but you are only precipitating your own disaster. The unfortunate sometimes draw misfortune on themselves.

  

Recognise the fortunate so that you may choose their company and the unfortunate so that you may avoid them. Misfortune is usually the crime of folly, and among those who suffer from it there is no malady more contagious.

  

## Law - 11

### Learn to keep people dependent on you

To maintain your independence, you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more freedom you have. Make people depend on you for their happiness and prosperity and you have nothing to fear. **_Never teach them enough so that they can do without you._**

Be the only one who can do what you do, and make the fate of those who hire you so entwined with yours that they cannot possibly get rid of you.

  

Necessity rules the world. People rarely act unless compelled to. If you create no need for yourself, then you will be done away with at first opportunity.

  

Power involves a relationship between people, you will always need others as allies, pawns or even as weak masters who serve as your front.

  

**Possess a talent and creative skill that simply cannot be replaced.**

By knowing other people's secrets, by holding information that they wouldn't want broadcast, you seal your fate with theirs. You are untouchable.

**It is better to be feared than loved. Fear you can control; love, never.**

When dependency disappears, so does civility and decency and then respect.

  

## Law - 12

### Use selective honesty and generosity to disarm your victim

An act of kindness, generosity, or honesty is often the most powerful form of distraction because it disarms other people's suspicions.

  

**_giving before you take_**

Unless the other person sees some gain for themselves, they may come to resent your neediness. Learn to give before you take. If someone believes you are honest at the start of your relationship it takes a lot to convince them otherwise. This gives you room to maneuver.

  

Honesty is one of the best ways to disarm the wary, but it is not the only one. Any kind of noble, apparently selfless act will serve. Perhaps the best such act, though, is one of generosity. Few people can resist a gift, even from the most hardened enemy, which is why it is often the perfect way to disarm people. A gift brings out the child in us, instantly lowering our defenses. Although we often view other people’s actions in the most cynical light, we rarely see the Machiavellian element of a gift, which quite often hides ulterior motives. A gift is the perfect object in which to hide a deceptive move.

  

Selective kindness will often break down even the most stubborn foe: Aiming right for the heart, it corrodes the will to fight back.

  

## Law - 13

### When asking for help, appeal to people's self-interest. Never to their mercy or gratitude

  

When people choose between talk about the past and talk about the future, a pragmatic person will always opt for the future and forget the past.

  

Every person you deal with is like another culture, an alien land with a past that has nothing to do with yours. Yet you can bypass the differences between you and him by appealing to his self-interest.

  

Self interest is the lever that will move people. Once you make them see how you can in some way meet their needs or advance their cause, their resistance to your requests for help will magically fall away.

  

## Law - 14

### Pose as a friend, work as a spy

  

In polite social interactions, learn to probe. Ask indirect questions to get people to reveal their weakness and intentions.

  

In the realm of power, your goal is a degree of control over future events. Part of the problem you face, then, is that people won’t tell you all their thoughts, emotions, and plans. Controlling what they say, they often keep the most critical parts of their character hidden—their weaknesses, ulterior motives, obsessions. The result is that you cannot predict their moves, and are constandy in the dark. The trick is to find a way to probe them, to find out their secrets and hidden intentions, without letting them know what you are up to.

  

The key here is to suppress yourself in the conversation, to make others talk endlessly about themselves and inadvertentiy reveal their intentions and plans.

  

He never talked about his own ideas, he got others to reveal theirs.

  

**Truth is so precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies.**

## **Law - 15**

### **Crush your enemy totally**

Feared enemy must be crushed completely. If one ember is left alight, no matter how dimly it smolders, a fire will eventually break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than through annihilation. The enemy will recover and seek revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spirit.

  

It must be exterminated, crushed and denied the chance to return to haunt us. Reconciliation is out of question. Only one side can win, and it must win totally.

  

**Those who seek to achieve things should show no mercy**

**#kautilya**

Have no mercy. Crush your enemies as totally as they would crush you. Ultimately the only peace and security you can hope from your enemies is their disappearance.

  

Allow your enemies no options. Annihilate them and their territory is yours to carve. The goal of power is to control your enemies completely, to make them obey your will. You cannot afford to go halfway. Give your enemies nothing to negotiate, no hope, no room to maneuver.

  

## Law - 16

### Use absence to increase respect and honour

Too much circulation makes the price go down. The more you are seen and heard from, the more common you appear. If you are already established in a group, temporary withdrawal from it will make you more talked about, even more admired. **Create value through scarcity.**

What withdraws, what becomes scarce, suddenly seems to deserve our respect and honor. What stays too long, inundating us with its presence, makes us disdain.

  

The more you are seen and heard from, the more your value degrades.

  

## Law - 17

### Keep others in suspended terror. Cultivate an air of unpredictability

Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to see familiarity in other people's actions. Your predictability gives them a sense of control. Be deliberately unpredictable. Behaviour that seems to have no consistency or purpose will keep them off balance and they will wear themselves trying to explain your moves.

  

A person of power instills a kind of fear by deliberately unsettling those around him to keep the initiative on his side.

  

Unpredictability is not only a weapon of terror. Scrambling your patterns on a day to day basis will cause a stir around you and stimulate interest.

  

## Law - 18

### Don't build fortresses to protect yourself - isolation is dangerous

  

Isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you from - it cuts you off from valuable information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to circulate amongst people, find allies, mingle.

  

Never enclose yourself so far from the streets that you cannot hear what is happening around you, including the plots against you.

  

Because humans are social creatures by nature, power depends on social interaction and circulation. All activity should revolve around you.

  

## Law - 19

### Know who you're dealing with - do not offend the wrong person

Choose your victims and opponents carefully - never offend or deceive the wrong person.

  

Nothing can substitute for gathering concrete knowledge.

  

## Law - 20

### Do not commit to anyone

By maintaining your independence, you become the master of others - playing people against one another, making them pursue you.

  

Do not let people drag you into petty fights and squabbles. Seem interested and supportive, but find a way to remain neutral. Let others do the fighting while you stand back, watch and wait. You can make it a practice in fact to stir up quarrels between other people, and then offer to mediate, gaining power as the go-between.

  

You have only so much energy and so much time. Every moment wasted on the affairs of others subtracts from your strength.

  

## Law - 21

### Play a sucker to catch a sucker - seem dumber than your mark.

The trick is to make your victims feel smart - and just smart but smarter than you.

  

## Law - 22

### Use the surrender tactic: transform weakness into power

  

## Law - 23

### Concentrate your forces

Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them concentrated at their strongest point. You gain more by finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than flitting from one shallow mine to another.

  

## Law - 24

### Play the perfect courtier

  

## Law - 25

### Recreate yourself

Recreate yourself by forging a new identity, one that commands attention and never bores the audience. Be the master of your own image rather than letting others define it for you. Incorporate dramatic devices into your public gestures and actions - your power will be enhanced and your character will seem larger than life.

  

## Law - 26

### Keep your hands clean

  

## Law - 27

### Play on people's need to believe to create a cultlike following

People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become the focal point of such desire by offering them a cause, a new faith to follow.

  

## Law - 28

### Enter Action with boldness

Timidity is dangerous. Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you commit through audacity are easily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; no one honors the timid.

- Lions circle the hesitant prey
- Boldness strikes fear, fear creates authority
- Going halfway with half a heart digs the deeper grave
- Hesitation creates gaps, boldness obliterates them
- Audacity separates you from the herd.

  

## Law - 29

### Plan all the way to the end

The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible consequences, obstacles and twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and give the glory to the others. By planning to the end you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know  when to stop.

  

## Law - 30

### Make your accomplishments seem effortless

  

## Law - 31

### Control the options - get others to play with the cards you deal

Give people options that come out in your favour whichever one they choose. Force them to make choice between the lesser of the two evils, both of which serve your purpose.

  

## Law - 32

### Play to people's fantasies

The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you are prepared for the anger that comes from disenchantment. Life is so harsh and distressing that people who can manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy are like oases in the desert. Everyone flocks to them. There is great power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses.

  

## Law - 33

### Discover each man's thumbscrew

  

## Law - 34

### Be royal in your own fashion - act like a king to be treated like one

The way you carry yourself will often determine how you are treated. In the long run, appearing vulgar or common will make people disrespect you.

  

## Law - 35

### Master the art of timing

Always seem patient, as if you know that everything will come to you eventually. Learn to stand back when the time is not yet ripe, and to strike fiercely when it has reached fruition.

  

## Law - 36

### Disdain things you cannot have - ignoring them is the best revenge

If there is something you want but cannot have, show contempt for it. The less interest you reveal, the more superior you seem.

  

## Law - 37

### Create compelling spectacles

Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the aura of power - everyone responds to them. Stage spectacles for those around you.

  

## Law - 38

### Think as you like but behave like others

  

## Law - 39

### Stir up waters to catch fish

**You must stay calm and positive.** But if you can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourself, you gain a decided advantage. Put your enemies off balance.

  

## Law - 40

### Despise the free lunch

Generosity is a sign and a magnet for power.

  

## Law - 41

### Avoid stepping into a great man's shoes

Establish your own name and identity by changing course.

  

## Law - 42

### Strike the shephered and the sheep will scatter

  

## Law - 43

### Work on the hearts and minds of others

  

## Law - 44

### Disarm and infuriate with the mirror effect

  

## Law - 45

### Preach the need for change, but never reform too much at once

  

## Law - 46

### Never appear too perfect

  

## Law - 47

### Don't go past the mark you aimed for. In victory learn when to stop

  

## Law - 48

### Assume formlessness