# Bharat Darshan

**14 January**

  

We had our attachment with the Hindustan Zinc in the morning. The mine was about 50 km from the circuit house.

  

It was taken over by the Vedanta in 2002. Its profit has risen many fold. We interacted with the management with to know about the best management practices. In nutshell it's the cutting the number of decision making

  

**17 January**

  

**16 January**

  

**15 January**

  

**18 February**

  

Today was the last day of our Bharat Darshan. Since our flight was scheduled in the evening our whole day was free. We decided to watch a movie at the nearby mall.

  

After the movie it was time to pack our bags for the final time. It's amazing how two months passed away in a jiffy. We reached airport and found that there were other 2 groups who were in the same Indigo flight.

  

It was nice meeting our batch mates after 2 months. There was laughter and chit chatting throughout the duration of our flight.

  

We reached Delhi at 9:30 from where we came to Janpath hotel. We thanked and congratulated each other for such a wonderful Bharat Darshan.

  

During our WST we came across a line in a local hindi newspaper and that has literally become the tag line for our group. The line goes like:

  

No Wonder, It's so rare !

  

So whenever we see a novel thing or experience something new we unfailingly have somebody mentioning this line.

  

  

* * *

  

**17 February**

We visited Sewa Gram ashram in the morning. Here Gandhiji lived here from 1936 to 1946. The ashram is maintained very well and all the artefacts of Gandhiji, Kasturba are well preserved. It was quite an experience reliving those historic moments. The ashram serves as a lesson towards adopting a simple lifestyle. As Gandhiji had said there is enough for man's need but not for man's greed in this world.

  

We then bought some Khadi clothings from the shop. After that we met District Collector Ashutosh Salil who is a 2010 batch IAS officer. He is considered to be a very upright officer and had grabbed headlines when he posted details of his personal assets in front of his office.

  

Thereafter we visited a mega food park. It had an integrated cold chain facility. The unit purchases cauliflower from farmers, processes it and then export it to Arab countries. With an investment of just about 60 crore rupees it serves as a good illustration of the huge potential that food processing industry has.

  

In the evening we decided to head towards Nagpur. We got an opportunity to visit NADT where we caught up with our FC friends. It was really a nice experience.

  

  

* * *

  

**16 February**

  

Today was our last day in Karimnagar. Our morning was free. We had collected a lot of souvenirs after Pune. So it was time to dispatch them else we would have incurred huge extra luggage charges in the Indigo flight from Nagpur to Delhi. We still wonder why academy did not book our tickets in an Air India flight where the baggage limit is 25 kg.

  

It was interesting to see that the DTDC courier shop was run by a lady who knew basic English and Hindi as well. Such things are generally not seen in North Indian states.

  

We had lunch in the guesthouse and bid adieu to the staff. Undoubtedly this was the best reception and accommodation we had in our 2 months of Bharat Darsan. The entire staff and district administration were just fantastic and if such attitude and behaviour is replicated elsewhere the country would become a better place to live.

  

We reached Seva gram at 7:30. Since the government guesthouse was already occupied our stay was arranged at MTDC guesthouse in Bor Reserve which is about 50 km from Wardha.

  

**13 February**

  

After having breakfast we boarded the train from Hyderabad for Pedampally. The train was bound for Danapur Bihar. In India one look at the platform is enough to say that the train is going to Bihar !

  

We reached Pedampally in about 3 hours. Since it is a small station therefore the train stops only for 2 minutes. As soon as we got down I saw about 30 people running towards us. Later I realised that they were district admin staff who had come to pick up our luggage. It was quite an experience !

  

Our accomdoation was at the beautiful NTPC guesthouse. The first thing that struck us was the excellent roads in the district. The state highways here are far better than several of our national highways.

  

After taking lunch we went to Sringeri coal mine office and then to Sripadyallampally water project on the Godavari river.

  

In the evening we went to NTPC sports ground and played 2 cricket matches. It was a great experience.

  

The staff here at the guesthouse is very cordial and hospitality is overwhelming.

  

**14 February**

  

On this valentine day today we visited two temples. Quite an interesting way to spend your valentine day !

  

The temples we visited are ancient temples constructed by Satavahana kings. The kind of hospitality that we received was overwhelming. In Telengana media follows you everywhere and even inside the temple there were 3 reporters who took our interviews. It was quite funny to see several of them taking our photos continously.

  

The temples here are very well maintained and unlike north Indian states there is a good civic sense here.

  

In the afternoon we met sub collector Shashank and Assistant collector Gautham. It was interesting talking to them about our academy, training in Delhi and Telengana.

  

After lunch we returned back to guesthouse and took rest.

  

**15 February**

  

We visited the Singeri coal mines in the morning. Gautham Sir from 2014 batch also accompanied us. We first saw the open cast mines and then were taken to the underground mines. It was quite an experience going down in the rail to about 200 m deep and witnessing the extraction of coal. As compared to Hindustan Zinc Mines in Udaipur the operation here looked a bit primitive.

  

We then had lunch and headed to NTPC plant. It is the largest power plant in South India and was awarded the best power plant in 2015. It's currently 2600 MW plant and plans to add another 4000 MW in future. Currently the thermal is getting a stiff competition from renewable sector and in coming years it will be mainly used for meeting the peak load.

  

We then visited the control room and saw the boilers in operation. Getting a birds eye view of the plant from 85 m height was an amazing experience.

  

In the evening we were invited for the dinner at DC house. Ms. Neetu Prasad IAS 2001 batch is currently the DC. We also met 2012, 2013 and 2014 batch IAS officers who are holding posts of Municipal Commissoner and Sub Collector in the Karimnagar district. We also played multilingual antakshari where songs in Hindi, Telugu, Tamil and English were sung by us.

  

**12 February**

  

- Visit to IICT
- Interaction with Anupama madam
- Visit to various units : Semiochemical, MolBank, Water Treatment plant etc
- Visit to IGRI
- Visit to T Hub
- Visit to Falaknuma palace

  

**11 February**

  

- Attachment with TASK
- Visit to Mee Seva centre
- Interaction with Jayesh Ranjan IT secretary
- Visit to Mama house

  

**10 February**

  

We had an early morning flight to Chennai in the morning. We strategically packed our bags to make sure that we don't pay through our noses once we board the Indigo flight. Some of us even took out our Bandhgala and Suits to lighten our baggage !

  

There was just 1 hour gap between our 2 flights. After reaching Chennai we rushed to pick up our luggage. Fortunately our flight got delayed by 1.5 hours and we could easily catch our next flight.

  

We reached Hyderabad in the afternoon. In the evening I headed towards NPA to meet my IPS friends. It was nice to meet them after 2 months. NPA campus is huge and has great infrastructure. Officer Trainees here have very hectic day. As a result most of them have become lean and fit. There is strict adherence to rules and violation of rules leads to real difficulties. Compared to NPA the rules at LBSNAA seem quite leniant.

  

By 10:30 we had to leave the academy and bid good bye to our friends. We will meet NPA folks during their ITBP attachment in Mussorie and also during Inter Services Meet.

  

**9 February**

  

Today we woke up early in the morning for scuba diving. We wore the special scuba suit and then given instructions for diving.

  

This was for the first time I was entering deep water and had some initial difficulty in getting accustomed to breathing through mouth.

  

We then were taken to deep water at about 10m. The sight under water was amazing and we could see several species of fish, coral reefs and various other aquatic life.

  

Although scuba diving cost 2200 Rs but it was worth the experience.

  

After that we took a Scooty and roamed around the island for several hours. The fresh air and beautiful countryside made it for a wonderful experience.

  

In the afternoon we again boarded the cruise for Andaman. Today the water was quite still and we did not experience much turbulence.

  

We reached port Blair in the evening and it was time to pack our bags and say goodbye to the majestic island. Some of us made plans to return to the island once our friends from AGMUT cadre get posted here !

  

**8 February**

  

We headed towards Ross island in the morning. It earlier used to be the capital during the British time. The boat we took was rickety and unfortunately the sea turned out to be quite choppy in the morning. There were signs of concerns on everyone's face as the boat oscillated in the open sea.

  

We got only 1 hour to explore the island. The island is mostly ruins. We saw a printing press, barracks, functional power house etc

  

Just after the Ross island we left for Havelock. The choppy waters again made life difficult as many people vomited and had really tough time.

  

After reaching Andaman we first went to Radhanagar beach. The bus ride to the beach was itself a pleasant experience as the countryside view was simply breathtaking.

  

The beach was one of the most beautiful I have ever seen. The beach sand was very smooth and fine and water was blue green. Watching sunset at the beach was quite memorable.

  

We had our stay at Dolphin resort. In the evening we met the DC of Andaman.

  

**7 February**

  

We reached Andaman at 7 in the morning. Despite being coastal area the outside temperature was not as humid as Chennai. It was for the first time that I was visiting an island. Our accommodation was at the Circuit house. The circuit house and surrounding area resembles that of Udaipur.

  

Deprived of sleep last night we slept throughout morning. In the afternoon we visited the cellular jail which was an amazing and emotional experience. The jail is also known as Kala Pani and is one of the dreadful jails ever. The most famous prisoner here was Veer Savarkar who was kept here for 10 years. We also visited the cell where he was put up.

  

Later there was a light and sound show which was quite informative. It described the construction of the jail, brutality of Jailer Perry, difficulties faced by the prisoners, numerous strikes by prisoners on account of their appalling conditions.

  

After coming back we were invited by the Deputy Commissoner to his house. We also met his 2 sons and 2 cute rabbits.

  

**13 January**

  

Early in the morning we had our first attachment with the Revenue board. We got to know Rajasthan is one of the few states in India which has a separate administrative framework to hear the revenue cases.

  

Then we headed for the much awaited Dargah Darshan. We first had a meeting with the Dargah administration. Although the Dargah has a separate act to govern however it has never been put into practice as the vested interest of few prevents any reform being undertaken.

  

In the afternoon we took the train from Ajmer to Udaipur.

  

**12 January**

  

Local sightseeing

Pushkar visit

  

**11 January**

  

Today we had to leave early in the morning for Ajmer. Our accommodation was at the Circuit house which is beautifully located near the lake and it presented a picturesque image.

  

We first had a meeting with the District Collector. We got to know that thanks to the efforts of the district administration maximum number of toilets were constructed in the Ajmer district.

  

We then visited a Gram Panchayat to learn about Digital Saheli intiative of the government. Under this scheme girls are trained to facilitate filling up of various forms related to government sector benefits etc. The village that we visited was an ODF village and we could see the impact that Swachh Bharat Abhiyan has created.

  

We also paid visit to Ajmer dairy and learnt about its operation. It's amazing how one Amul experiment by Verghese Kurien has catapulted our country to become self sufficient in milk production. Ajmer dairy is also run on a cooperative basis and the profit earned is channeled back for the benefit of milk producers.

  

In the evening we also visited a Jain temple which has been recently constructed. It's a grand temple.

  

**27 December**

  

We had to leave in the morning for our respective post. Five of us (Me, Ashish, Khushaal, Madhvi and Kuhuk) were to have our training with Khalsa regiment.

  

We were required to wear thermals and army shoes. Wearing the shoe itself took half an hour as it was nearly impossible to get our feet in there.

  

After about 2 hours of journey we reached a place called Maria top where we met Lieutenant Partho sir who belongs to the judicial service in the army and like us undergoing training for one year in the army.

  

From there it was a steep climb to the Shankar post where we were to spend next 4 days. We had 3 soldiers to accompany us as it is a protocol in the army to always move in a minimum squad of 6.

  

Along the way we came across many army post of different regiments like Sahasthra Seema Bal, Rajputana etc. Everywhere we were offered hot water, tea and coffee.

  

Walking with bullet proof jacket and heavy shoes was itself a unique although a bit tiring experience. After 2 hours we reached our destination. We were warmly greeted by Major Sandeep Sir who had joined the army in 2005.

  

We were accomdated in a single large room and were given Extreme Climate Clothing (ECC) to wear. After the lunch we took rest and were to have a meeting with Sir in the night.

  

Dinner time was fun as we had a long conversation with sir on various aspects of army. The presence of Tata Sky facility even at such a remote location made it even more better.

  

The dessert served in the army is known as pudding and as always they were delicious.

  

It was going to be our first night in sub zero temperature and surrounded by ice all around. We were provided with sleeping bags and a kero heater in the room to withstand such cold weather.

  

**28 December**

  

It was extremely cold outside in the morning and due to gusty winds even 2 degree Celsius felt like -5 degree. There was no scope for taking any bath in such cold weather !

  

We had Parantha, curd and tea for the breakfast which was delicious. Our only connection to outside world was through a satellite phone which was provided to us in our room

  

Today Sandeep Sir took us to the Raja post. The post is barely 100 m away from the Pakistani post. It's a vulnerable post as it is dominated by the enemy. Last year an Indian soldier was killed when the enemy opened an unprovoked firing from the other side. However, Indian side too gave a befitting response.

  

For the first time I saw a Pakistani soldier manning their post. It was quite a thrill to see their post from such a close distance. We also saw the functioning of an MMG which is strategically placed at the enemy posts.

  

We had lunch there and interacted with the soldiers. We came to know that these soldiers themselves prepare food as army doesn't have separate cook for every post. The Sikh regiment enjoys both their food and duty and that's one of the reason for their cheerfulness.

  

The jawans showed us a shrine. It was interesting to see that the same place was used earlier as temple by the Madras regiment and as a Dargah by JKLi. This clearly was secularism at its best.

  

We came back to Shankar in the afternoon.

  

**29 December**

  

Our 3 days at the post had made us accustomed to the weather and we longer felt as cold as we experienced on the first day.

  

We had a meeting with Commanding officer today. Madhvi and Kuhuk who were at different post were supposed to join us for meeting. It was nice to meet them after 3 days and share our experiences. For both of our group the hospitality of the army and especially the enthusiasm of the Sikh regiment had overwhelmed us. We also had quite a fun playing in the snow.

  

We had a long discussion with the commanding officers on areas such as army civilian relationship, shortage of officers, living conditions of soldiers etc. Both agreed that attachment of IAS and IPS probationers helps in knowing each other better. He also stressed on the point that the ultimate aim of both the establishment is the progress of the nation and therefore the turf war that ensues from time to time such as the recent OROP issue is quite unfortunate.

  

After the lunch the lieutenant Partho sir was kind enough to show us how an AK 47 is assembled and disassembled.

  

We then bid good bye to CO and called it a day.

  

**6 February**

  

I woke early in the morning to go for a walk. The morning cool breeze alongside sea waves was quite soothing. Being a private beach it was very clean.

  

After having breakfast we headed back to Chennai. All along roadside we saw huge cutouts of leaders from AIADMK and DMK. It's quite interesting and intriguing to note that every nook and corner of the city is replete with such hordings and posters. On a lighter note it seems as if there is a while department here for putting up posters. This is in stark contrast to Rajasthan and Gujarat where such sights are seldom seen.

  

In the evening we went to buy sarees. Chennai is known for its silk sarees and there are very famous shops like Nalli and Pothys. The number and varieties of sarees can leave one mesmerised and confused.

  

I also got an opportunity to talk to a roadside vendor who had migrated from Bihar. He made a very interesting point that in Chennai it's unthinkable to witness incidents of chain snatching whereas in Bihar its unthinkable for a woman to venture outside alone in the night. This really left me wondering the kind of degeneration that Bihar and UP have gone through.

  

We had an early morning flight to catch for Andaman. However the

  

**5 February**

  

It was a wonderful morning at Tamilnadu beach resort. We had our breakfast and lunch and then went to Mahabalipuram for local sightseeing. There are many temples here. The temples were mostly built by Pallavas rulers prominent among them being King Narasimham. We visited the Ratha Temple, Arjuna Penance and the famous Sea Shore temple. All these temples are rock cut and represent the pinnacle of temple construction in India.

  

In the evening we were invited to see the ongoing dance festival. It is an annual event which is held for 30 days. Dancers from all regions of India are invited. We got the opportunity to witness the amazing Bharatnatyam and Rural Folk Dance. There were lots of foreign tourists and some of them have been coming here for last 10 years which goes to show the level of interest that foreigners have in Indian culture.

  

We then had a dinner with H.S.Meena sir who is Tourism Commissoner. He informed us that Tamil Nadu receives maximum tourist footfalls in India. We also had a discussion about the difference in administration among the north and south Indian states and how difficult or easy is to gain proficiency in Tamil language for an outsider.

  

**4 January**

  

Today we had to visit Gulmarga. However the weather turned inclement and it started to rain in Srinagar which implied heavy snowfall in Gulmarga making vehicle movement extremely difficult.

  

After much deliberations we decided to instead head towards Tugmarg which is 12 km away from Gulmarga.

  

We reached there in about 2 hours and what a sight it was. For the first time ever in life I experienced snow fall. We then spent next couple of hours in playing in and with snow. It was time to become kids again and engage in snowfight notwithstanding any concerns for catching cold.

  

It was also interesting to see buses with chains strapped on their tires to prevent skidding on ice.

  

We then had our lunch and headed back to Srinagar. It was to be our last day in Kashmir.

  

**3 January**

  

It was time for our first brush with the civilian administration. We were to spend next 2 days with the district administration. We were accomdated at the circuit house which was quite good.

  

After the lunch we first visited the ancient Mughal Gardens. Srinagar has many large gardens built by the Mughals. The garden did not have many flowers as it was an off season. Nevertheless the garden was grand and majestic.

  

After that it was time for the most awaited Dal Lake visit and Shikara ride. Contrary to our expectations the lake turned out to be very dirty and therefore was quite a letdown. There were trashes everywhere thrown in the lake. It was a poignant reminder of how we are encroaching on waterbodies.

  

We then headed out for shopping and bought Kashmiri shawls and suits.

  

**2 January**

  

In the morning we had to leave for Srinagar. We were to move in an army convoy. It was fascinating to see such meticulous preparation for the vehicle movement.

  

We were clearly instructed not to open windows and venture out of the vehicle and to wear the bullet proof jacket even inside the vehicle. It was also a time for the reunion with our other friends who had attachment with different army regiments.

  

It took us almost 5 hours to reach Srinagar military headquarters. We had to quickly change our dress and get ready for briefing within half an hour.

  

We then interaction with senior army officials where we shared our experience and discussions on topics ranging from insurgency to civil military relations.

  

In the evening we were invited for a formal dinner in the officers mess.

  

With this our army attachment came to an end. It was amazing spending 8 days with the army.

  

**1 January**

  

We began our new year with some serious stuff. We were briefed by the army on various strategic posts of India and Pakistan, topography of the region, strategic locations and challenges faced by the army.

  

We then visited a school which has been built by the army under the Sadbhavana mission. The school visit was very good..We saw the use of modern ICT tools in classrooms.

  

After that we visited the NHPC plant. It began its operation last year. We interacted with the engineering staff and learnt about the technologies and various stages involved in hydro power generation. Being an electrical engineer I could very well relate to the theories of machines and power generation that I had learnt in college.

  

Our last visit for the day was to Kamaan post where trade between India and Pakistan takes place. It was interesting to see the decorated trucks from Pakistan. We learnt that close to Rs. 2 lakh is spent on decorating a truck.

  

On arriving at the post we saw Pakistani security officials curiosly taking our photographs. It was quite worrying to know that in the past there have been unprovoked firing from Pakistan.

  

We returned back to Uri in the evening. It was going to be our last day in Uri.

  

**4 February**

  

Today we had attachment with Chennai Metro Rail Limited. The percentage of population using public transport in Chennai is about 35 per cent which is less than the average figure of 65 per cent in developed countries. To meet this gap metro seems to be the perfect fit. The project is 50 per cent financed by JICA and rest by the Centre and the states.

  

The CMRL is headed by Mr Pankaj Bansal who is an IAS officer of 1997 batch. He is quite a jovial person and during interaction it never felt as if we were talking to such a senior bureaucrat.

  

We were briefed about the Underground operation, tunneling operation etc We then visited the central command room from where entire operation is monitored. It makes use of SCADA system.

  

We also visited the rail depot and saw the underground tunnelling work in action. The herculean task is performed by huge 80 m long TBM machines.

  

After that we had lunch at Taj Coramandel where we were joined by Mr H S Meena who is also a 1997 batch officer and currently Commissoner working in the tourism department.

  

In the evening we visited the famous Chepauk stadium which is just opposite the Government guest house. It was amazing to get our photos clicked alongside portraits of giants like Gavaskar, David and Sachin.

  

**3 February**

  

Today we had attachment with National Chemical Laboratory. It is one of the 37 laboratories of Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.

  

NCL produces largest number of parents in India. Moreover the impact factor of its journals are is quite high.

  

We first had an video conferencing session with Ms. Anupama who is an IAS officer of 1991 batch. She was quite candid and told us how she had not visited any CSIR laboratory in 25 years of service before joining as joint secretary in the ministry of science and tech. She stressed on the point that while infrastructure and industries etc are sought after posts there are hardly any takers for science department. This needs to change and we really need a pool of science administrator who would play a pivotal role in establishing the necessary ecosystem for science and research to flourish.

  

It has patented a biofuel technology which is used by a plant in Nebraska. This shows our capability to export hi tech knowledge.

  

Water filters that don't require electricity to run.

  

An interesting example of everyday application was how to dispose lakhs of Ganesha idols which pollute our water bodies. Similarly use of material science for security features in notes was quite interesting.

  

NCL is working in the field of improving the chemical processes. For example by changing homogenous catalyst to heterogenous there is now 40 per cent increase in the efficiency.

  

We then visited the labs and saw highly sophisticated machined like NMR, Electron Microscope etc.

  

NCL also has an incubation centre and currently mentors 38 start up firms.

  

Post lunch we visited URDIP (Unit for Research & Decelopment in Intellectual Property). The unit especialises in analysing vast amount of data in the field of patents, plant, toxicology etc. This helps in identifying key areas where there is significant scope of improvement. So its the brain work behind CSIR activities.

  

**30 December**

  

Today we had to go from Shankar to Rani post which was at least 2.5 hours away. We started early as we had to return the same day. The initial stretch was really difficult and it was literally an uphill task !

  

To keep us motivated we had regular hot water, tea breaks. The width of the path was quite narrow and we were informed that due to strong winds 2 casualties have taken place on this route.

  

We encountered 2 feet snow in between and it was real fun navigating through thick snow. However it is equally dangerous as one wrong step could end up in fatal accident.

  

We finally made it to the top and it really felt nice being at 11000 feet. From Rani we get a birds eye view of the entire Pakistan and Indian check posts. Rani is one of the most critical posts and therefore it is quite big and well equipped.

  

After lunch we headed down and reached Shankar post in no time. We realised how difficult it is for soldiers to move up and down daily on that track.

  

Sandeep sir asked us to take much needed rest. After that we went to our rooms and came back for dinner. It was to be our last dinner at Shankar. For the first time we also tasted canned vegetables. The taste was not that great and it's difficult to imagine how our soldiers survive on them for as long as 4 months.

  

Our interaction went well beyond the midnight.

  

**31 December**

  

Today was our last day at the LoC. Our day started with a demonstration by soldiers about how an ambush is done. It really involves a lot of skill and coordination to first identify and then shoot the enemy before he does.

  

Then came the moment we were all waiting for. We finally got the opportunity to lay our hands on weapons and fire INSAS rifle and Light Machine Gun (LMG). Our major ensured that our aim does not deviate from the target lest it would lead to fatal injuries to others. The feel of pressing the trigger and bullets zooming ahead was fascinating and one of the most memorable events.

  

We then interacted with the soldiers. They highlighted certain problems that they face back at their homes. For example the issue of schools, health and litigation related to lands were prominently highlighted. They also said that they will ensure good education to their child so that they occupy officer ranks in the army. Overall they looked content and satisfied with the army life and did not have any major grievances related to their salary or facilities.

  

It was now time to bid good bye to Shankar Post and head towards Uri base. I really felt sad at that moment. We had to walk for about 1.5 hours through steep stones to reach the navigable road. We reached Uri in the afternoon.

  

We then had an interaction with adjutant Vimal Roy who invited us for the new year party. We also met our other batch mates after 5 days. The party thrown was quite good and we interacted with senior officers in the army.

  

We celebrated the new year during the party itself.

  

**2 February**

  

Today we had an attachment with EMCURE pharma company. It was set up in 1983 by Satish Mehta an IIM Ahmedabad alumnus.

  

The company has a turnover of 6500 crore and is the 15th largest pharma company in India and occupies number 1 spot in gynae medicine and is a pioneer in the field of chiral.

  

It is a solely generic company and has just started its journey into drug discovery.

  

It has more than 500 scientists and researchers working in the research and development.

  

We were taken around the plant and we visited the R&D division and the manufacturing plant. The whole process reminded us about organic chemistry classes we had in our schools and colleges.

  

The process of manufacturing drug is extremely complex and has to meet stringent requirements set by the US FDA. The plant has to be ready for surprise inspection any time.

  

Post lunch we had an interactive session with Satish Mehta and Chief Scientific Officer Mukund Gurjar who has 25 years of experience in National Chemical Laboratory.

  

Mr Mehta was quite optimistic about the future of bureaucracy and India. He cited examples of brilliant work done by the Municipal Commissoners of Pune, Surat and Nagpur.

  

We also had a discussion on patent policy of India.

  

We were really amazed to see the kind of reception that we got.

  

**1 February**

  

Today we had our attachment with Bajaj Automobiles

We first visited the Chakan plant and were briefed by the HR head.

Bajaj is the leading motorcycle company in India and also has a significant global presence.

It's figures in the top 10 most trusted brands in India and was company of the year in 2012.

It exports 4000 vehicles everyday and also reports the highest EBITDA margin in the automobile sector.

Avenger, Pulsar, Discover are the flagship models in India. It also owns 48 per cent in KTM company based in Austria which is into sports bike segment.

It has a turnover of 24000 crore. Bajaj currently has 4 plants in India. 3 of them are in Maharashtra whereas 4th is in Pantnagar

Bajaj follows the Kaizen model of continous improvement and also is a pioneer in the adopting TPM (The Prime Mover) approach.

It strives to achieve zero defect manufacturing process.

All the employees are diploma engineers and are called line engineers. The vertical hierarchy in the organisation is not more than 5 or 6 in any department which is significantly lower than companies like Tata and Mahindra.

Bajaj currently focuses on a singular agenda of being the best in the motorcycle segment. According to it there is no point in venturing into those segment where it does not have the core competence.

Bajaj is the only company which has not gone into joint venture with foreign company. It has taken the task of doing in house R & D.

Bajaj has outsourced most of its non critical activities and focuses only on research and development, assembling components and handling the brand. This had led to significant reduction in the employee strength from 20000 in the year 2003 to 9000 at present.

It was nice to see that a day in the company begins with the hoisting of the national flag and singing of national anthem. Its motto is to work for the advancement of the country.

The success of the Bajaj can be gauged from the fact that India is the only country where giants like Honda, Yamaha and Kawasaki have been able to take a firm lead.

Bajaj is a shining example of Make in India success story.

We also visited the shop floor and saw the process of assembling engine and Avenger bike

Post lunch we had interaction with the heads of HR and Finance department. They fondly recalled how some of the ex Bajaj employees went on to join Civil Services and are doing stupendous job.

  

**31 January**

  

We had no attachments today

Went to mall for shopping

Mumbai faced severe problem of air pollution

We took the train for Pune

Our accommodation at hotel management and catering skill centre.

  

**30 January - SRA**

  

We had an attachment with Slum Rehabilitation Authority.

It is headed by Aseem Gupta who is a 1994 batch IAS officer.

Mumbai faces a severe problem of slum and more than 50 per cent of the population lives in slums.

SRA was set up in 1995. The model followed by it is quite unique and emulated by several other cities.

Here the focus is on in situ rehabilitation. First the consent of 70 per cent slum dwellers is taken for removing slums. Then the people choose the developers of their choice. The developer is required to construct multi storey houses and in return gets equal area of land for it's own residential project.

After the construction the houses are allotted free in a transparent manner.

Till date approximately 2 lakh houses have been successfully constructed. However this is just 10 per cent of the actual requirement.

The model is thus moderately successful. It has also many shortcomings as well

First this will work only where the land prices are very high. Second the authority sits on a revenue of massive 2800 crore and doesn't know how to spend it !

There are allegations of corruptions, nepotism etc

Providing permanent rights to illegal slum dwellers is itself questionable as it encourages creation of more slums.

We also visited a newly constructed building.

The flat size is 269 Sq feet and is quite decent and is far better than the cramped and unhygienic slum dwellings.

  

**29 January**

  

We visited INS Sindhughosh submarine.

It's a kilo class submarine. India presently has 10 of them. It was commissioned in 1986 and it is made by Russia.

It has a length of 72 metre and crew strength of 50. It can remain underwater for 45 days. The source of power is diesel electric.

We were taken inside the submarine which was a unique experience. There is hardly any space inside to move around. This has been done to fit as many equipments as possible. Submarine is certainly not a place to be for claustrophobic person.

We then saw the command room, weapon compartment. It can fire 6 torpedos and host of others lethal weapons.

It was surprising to know that submarine wing of Navy is a voluntary service and all the officers will have to work on submarine throughout their life. Personally I think that it is one of the most difficult situation to work and hats off to our brave navy men for chosing this field.

The living space is nothing more than 2 tier railway compartment. For 45 days one cannot take a bath and has the only option of changing clothes every 4 days.

We had refreshment in a ward room which also serves the purpose of meeting, sleeping, recreation and can also be transformed into a full fledged hospital room.

This marks the end of our defence and navy attachment. It was indeed an enthralling and exhilarating experience for us.

  

**28 January - Navy**

  

INS Mumbai commissioned in 2001 and Delhi class of ships. It is the third ship in this series the first two being Delhi and Mysore respectively.

It is 162 m long and is a destroyer.

It is fitted with guns, torpedo launcher and radar.

We visited the operation control room.

It has 4 gas turbines. The turbines were really huge. It's really a challenge to operate and maintain them as the temperatures reach 60 degree Celsius.

It can also accommodate 2 helicopters. At a time there are 350 men on the ship.

We had lunch on the ship.

We were then briefed by the aviation wing of Navy the INS Shikhra.

We saw Chetak, Seawing and Kamos class of helicopters.

Chetak is the work horse of the Navy. It was brought from France. It has been now completely Indianized and now made by HAL. It can also be mounted with guns and torpedo launcher. It is used for rescue operation.

Kamos helicopter is unique in the sense that it lacks tail rotors. Instead it has two sets of rotors. To generate torques both rotate in different directions. It is a Russian design.

Seaking is a British helicopter.

In the evening we visited Marine Drive, Leopold cafe, Gateway of India, Taj Hotel and saw the house of Shah Rukh Khan.

  

**28 January - Navy**

  

INS Angre

1208 islands in India

7500 km coastline,

Coastal security scheme

Human trafficking

26/11 is key trigger. 4 area. FOC in C west. Gujarat, MH, Goa and KN

Commander Coast Guard region into West and East

3 tier responsibility. 5 km marine , 5 - 12 coast guard. Navy beyond 12 nautical miles

Daily surveillance sorties from IMBL to Karnataka

Offshore defence area Mumbai High, Bassein

Radar surveillance

VATMS - Air Traffic Management System

Immediate Support Vessel. 17 in Western Naval Command

5-6 24 X 7 patrol

Sagar Prahari Bal upto 12 NM

38 Radar Network

Operation Trigger frequently conducted

Sagar Kavach exercise in 4 states to have good coordination among all stakeholders. Twice a year and 3 4 days. All contingencies are taken into account

Joint operation centre and Regional Coastal Security Operational Centre

NC3I software gets feed from all the sources. 25000 contacts tracked 24x7

Maritime domain awareness

Vessel traffic management system

Coastal database

Fisheries database on RealCraft software

Fishing boats with AIS transponder

Over 3000 landing points reduced and unwanted sealed. Now only 1500 points manned 24x7 and cctv camera

Coastal security awareness campaign.

Marine police training institute at Dwarka

Color coding of fishing boats linked with diesel subsidy

Biometric identity cards issued

1093 toll free number

Coastal security bill being considered

IMAC centre in Gurgaon. Information Management Analysis Centre

  

**27 January - Surat Urban Development Authority (SUDA)**

  

Development plan and TP state

43 per cent urban. 3rd highest in India

Highest decadal growth rate

Well developed planning since ancient times

TP : Town planning. Bombay town planning act.

Gujarat Town Planning and Urban Development Act 1976

Macro level development plan and micro level tps for 100 hectares

Consultative process

Outer Ring Road 90m wide 66km long without acquiring single Sq m of land

SMC permitted 70m building and allowed FSI till 4 while the usual norm is 1.8

Self finance model. Model for other cities as well.

Alternative to land acquisition

DREAM city Diamond Research and Mercantile city Surat

Diamond Research Institute.

Wifi city. Shift the trading from Mumbai to Surat

EWS housing + Green building project

SUDA - Planning, Construction and Admin

300 crore budget for 15-16. 500 crore budget for 16-17

Automatic development. Online checking and generation of reports.

Green building SUDA

EWS home at 3 lakh. The house was constructed really well. 30 Sq m area. There are certain criteria to be met. For example annual income has to be less than 1 Lakh and the person has to be a resident of Surat for at least 3 years.