# Chess

Always identify your opponent's threats before you start thinking about your own moves.

  

  

train yourself to investigate all checks and captures, no matter how trivial they may seem, as well as always make sure your pieces are protected. Don't move a piece to an undefended square unless it is crucial. Furthermore, always make sure your pieces have escape squares. A lot of times a player might grab a pawn with a queen or any piece, and end up getting trapped.

  

Your goal is to find the opponent's checks, captures, and threats on every move, of every game

  

Also, check out the 70 page chapter on "Thought Process" in Dan Heisman's A Guide to Chess Improvement: The Best of Novice Nook.  His books, including The World's Most Instructive Amateur Games Book often look at thinking mistakes: he knows most games are won or lost due to giving away pieces.  The preface, to the ...Games Book includes this:

  

"Well, Dan," Howard Stern's familiar bass voice intoned, "now that I am up to 1000, that's about it. I can't seem to beat those 1100's.

  

"But Howard," I protested, "you're just giving them free pieces and they are taking some of them. They are giving you free pieces and you aren't taking as many of them. If you just stop giving them free pieces and take all of theirs, you will beat them every game...basically, it's as easy as that.

  

Four years later Howard was rated 1700 ICC (Internet)."

  

Jeremy Silman's book, The Amateur's Mind, looks at the difference in thinking between masters and lower rated players.  But, at 443 pages, it's a long study - I recommend Heisman first.