# Terms

[http://www.letslearnaccounting.com/sundry-debtors](http://www.letslearnaccounting.com/sundry-debtors)

**Reserves and Surplus**

Reserve means cetrain amount taken from the profit and loss  account to meet the sudden losses due natural calamities or

to pay the premimum to the shareholders when profits are  insufficient

  

The excess of income over expenditure is konown as  surplus.

  

  

Assets = Liability + Equity

  

**Preference Shares**

Preference shares consist of a company stock with dividends that are paid to shareholders before common stock dividends are paid out. In the event of a company bankruptcy, preferred stock shareholders have a right to be paid company assets first. Preference shares typically pay a fixed dividend, whereas common stocks do not. And unlike common shareholders, preference share shareholders usually do not have voting rights.

  

**Sundry Debtors**

When a business firm supplies the goods or provides the service to its customer on credit basis then those customers are called as sundry debtors. These customers are supposed to pay the outstanding amount on a particular date.

  

**Trade Payable**

Definition: A trade payable is an amount billed to a company by its suppliers for goods delivered to or services consumed by the company in the ordinary course of business. These billed amounts, if paid on credit, are entered in the accounts payable module of a company's accounting software, after which they appear in the accounts payable aging report until they are paid. Any amounts owed to suppliers that are immediately paid in cash are not considered to be trade payables, since they are no longer a liability.

  

Trade payables are nearly always classified as current liabilities, since they are usually payable within one year. If that is not the case, then such payables can be classified as long-term liabilities. A longer-term liability typically has an interest payment associated with it, and so is more likely to be classified as long-term debt.