# RS

1. Best in the world.
2. Contribute to the success of better world.
3. Legendary Performance.
4. Mental architecture and core beliefs.
5. Epic results.
6. Game changers leverage setbacks and disappointments.
7. 63000 words of information on an average day.
8. Checks smart phones 110 times in a day.
9. Addiction to distraction is death of productivity.
10. Protect your focus from distraction.
11. Ordinary people becoming game changers.
12. Bounce around without serious commitment to the growth.
13. Act on great ideas.
14. Ideation without execution is mere delusion.
15. Mountain top of success and dark valley of failure.
16. Living in my mind.
17. Never make the cut.
18. People may forget what you say. People may forget what you do. But no one will ever forget how you make them feel.
19. Fast track to success.
20. So many of us die at 30 and are buried at 90.
21. Strong souls find it within them to use adversarities to their advantage.
22. Obsessed with human capacity and capability.
23. Inexplicable joy and internal power.
24. Chattering voices of naysayers. The world would call you crazy and would mock you.
25. Criticism is the price bravery has to pay.
26. Humility.
27. Discover new rituals and patterns. Not a quick fix.
28. If you are not making mistakes regularly, you are playing it too small.
29. Life is not meant to be lived out loud.
30. There is no effort without error and shortcoming

  

**A Mighty Vision**

1. Today is the ideal day to start your best life. Let go of average. The bigger your dream, the more talent gets released from within you. 
2. Set audacious and scary goal and vision.
3. All progress depends on the unreasonable man.
4. Elon Musk - viewed the world through different filter.
5. Unfathomable.
6. Course correction.
7. Outrageous dream
8. Don't die with greatest dream buried within you.
9. Fire in the belly approach.
10. Deeply compelling cause. Helping elevate humanity. To improve the very fate of humanity.
11. Making a difference.
12. You don't get lucky, you make lucky.
13. Cut from different cloth, different gene?
14. Neuroplasticity - the more we flex our mind the better it would become.
15. Installation of one belief - my potential and talent can grow. Fixed mindset and growth mindset.  
16. Einstein was called slow.
17. What you do with your talent is far important than the potential you were born with.
18. Focus, persistence, grit and practice.
19. Being a game changer is a lonely sport.
20. Crisis as an opportunity.
21. If being world class is easy, everyone would be doing it.
22. Iconic
23. Everything you now find easy, you earlier found hard.
24. Sail into blue ocean of great achievement.
25. Self discipline breaks lucky break every single time.
26. One day Picasso was in a marketplace. Huge fan and drawing. Piece of paper. That will be a million dollar. That took you 30 seconds to do that? It took me 30 years of relentless practice to give it you that drawing in 30 seconds.
27. Greatness is less about revolution and more about evolution.
28. **The more you learn, the more you will achieve.** Fanatical learner.
29. Warren Buffet reads about 10 hours every day. Know more do more.
30. Steve Jobs was obsessed.
31. If you are best at what you do, people will blaze the path to your door.
32. Traffic university.
33. Right angle turns to the life.
34. If they can do it, why not you.
35. Person who learns the most, wins.
36. CEO gets buried next to the street sweeper.
37. Imagine the last hours of life. What would matter at that time? Shiny toys that society sells us as true signs of succcess would hardly matter. It would come down to 2 fundamental things: Who did you become. Brave, loving, work that matters. Man of honor, decency and humanity. How many people did you help?
38. I might not have the big title, but using my power it could produce a cascading effect.