# Untitled Note

[https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-great-short-stories-with-a-twist-ending](https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-great-short-stories-with-a-twist-ending)

It was a crowded flight and a beautiful lady aged around 40 years boarded the flight as the passenger. She searched for her seat and found her seat was next to a black man.  
  
She showed that she wasn’t in a hurry to take her seat as she found it too hard and awkward to sit next to a black man.  
  
Feeling disgusted, the beautiful lady called the air hostess and asked her to change her seat.  
  
The air hostess requested for a reason why she would like to change the seat.  
She replied, “It is impossible for me to sit next to a black man, I hate it!   
  
The air hostess was shocked to hear these hard words from the one who looked so dignified and composed.  
She again demanded her to get her a new seat. The airhostess said she would do so and requested her to wait for a few minutes.   
  
The air hostess went in search of an empty seat for the lady. The air hostess told the lady, ‘I’m afraid Madam, there is no vacant seat in the economy class and the flight is almost full! However, we do follow the policy to fulfil the desires of our passengers to the maximum extent possible. So, give me a minute, I will check with my captain and get back to you, as we feel it is not fair to force a passenger to have an unpleasant seat!’  
  
The lady waited for a couple of minutes and the air hostess came.  
  
The latter replied, ‘Madam, sorry for this inconvenience. We don’t want to make your journey unpleasant by making you sit next to someone with whom you aren’t comfortable. There is one seat available in the First Class. Although we don’t allow any passenger to move from economy class to first class, to make you a happy customer, we are doing this for the first time in our company’s history. Our captain agreed to shift from economy class to first class.!’  
  
Just before the lady said any word as a reply, the air hostess humbly requested the black man and told him, ‘Dear sir, would you please shift your seat to first class? Please retrieve all your personal items from your seat and our captain would like to move you to first class as we don’t really want you to have an uncomfortable journey sitting next an unpleasant person, with an ugly mind!‘  
  

The lady was quiet and frozen! A few of the fellow passengers were happy and gave huge applause for the flight crew!