# 19 January

Went to breakfast early so to relish the sumptous and luxurious offerings. Had 3 course breakfast. Spent almost 1 hour in the food lounge.

  

Our first attachment was with Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC). We visited the Sabarmati Riverfront. It's a 11 km long stretch. The Sabarmati river is not a perennial river therefore water in it is brought from Narmada river. The project was started in 2004 and is now almost complete. The depth of the water varies from 10 feet to 22 feet. Gujarat being a dry state faces chronic shortage of water and as such maintaining water in the riverfront during dry spell proves to be a challenge. We also saw a huge machine cleaning the river of debris, religious offerings. We were informed that there are only 2 such machines in India, the other being used in  Dal Lake, Srinagar.

AMC has done a fantastic job in utilising the tourism and revenue potential of the river front. 14 per cent of the riverfront will be sold to private companies. This will make it self sustaining. Recently a kite festival was hosted. Also regular concerts by famous singers like Arijit Singh are also organized. The riverfront has given a facelift to the city.

  

Next we went to see BRTS control room. We were briefed about the BRTS. It operates a fleet of more than 200 buses and carries an average of 1.2 lakh passengers everyday. All buses send their data to the control room every 10 seconds which makes it easier to track and plan the routes for the buses. The system has won numerous national and international awards. It was good to know that the power to fix the ticket rates lies with the organization and unlike many other states does not suffer from political interference. The whole project is run on PPP basis where the buses are operated by the private players. It's still not profitable and has to rely on subsidy from the state government. It's one of the few BRTS system in India that has worked so well. They first started with a 12 km free trial run where they factored in the feedback from the commuters and incorporated them in the system. The system faces the challenge of last mile connectivity. It requires a good feeder system for the same. BRTS offers free service to Physically handicapped and blind people.

  

We then went to IIM Ahmedabad. The campus is divided into two parts viz. Old Campus and New Campus. We were first taken around old campus to see the library and classroom. The classroom and the whole campus reminded me of my college IIT Delhi. We were then briefed about IIM Ahmedabad and its history. After that we had a discussion with Shailesh Gandhi who is the dean of academics. He highlighted the challenge of putting IIM-A on the international map. A good business school should have international students and faculties. IIMs lack in both as we are not ble to attract good students and also faculties due to poor salaries. I also had a chit chat with the students. It is widely accepted that the curriculum at IIM-A is one of the toughest in the world. Generally we got a positive feedback about faculties and teaching pedagogy.

  

We then boarded a BRTS bus and went from IIM-A to a nearby lake. The bus ride was good and the reason why the system has won so many awards was evident. The whole model looks well thought out and very professional. We ended our day with some fun games at the lakeside.