---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Untitled Note

[https://www.google.co.in/search?q=love+me+like+you+do+lyrics&oq=love+me+l&gs\_l=serp.3.1.0i67k1l2j0i20k1j0i67k1j0l6.6301.7879.0.10950.9.7.0.0.0.0.438.438.4-1.1.0....0...1.1.64.serp..8.1.436.fPTgVzGZoSs](https://www.google.co.in/search?q=love+me+like+you+do+lyrics&oq=love+me+l&gs_l=serp.3.1.0i67k1l2j0i20k1j0i67k1j0l6.6301.7879.0.10950.9.7.0.0.0.0.438.438.4-1.1.0....0...1.1.64.serp..8.1.436.fPTgVzGZoSs)

Dear Ila

  

I just can't explain how excited I was on 16th June i.e. the day of your arrival. In the morning I cleaned the room to the best of my capacity. In the afternoon I again came back to room to make sure that everything is alright (waise you always make fun and scold me for keeping room so untidy! and I love those scolding)

  

As the clock struck 4 I got impatient. Although the names of ministries were being announced I had hardly interest in knowing them. I just wanted to reach the airport as soon as possible. As soon as I got free I rushed to the hostel. It started raining and I thought whether Murphy's law was in operation again. 

  

I left the hostel with an umbrella and was hoping to somehow make it to the airport before you reach as I did not want you to wait at the airport. The news of your flight being delayed saddened me and I was praying that flight should not get delayed.

  

The news that you boarded the flight made me so haapppy. I looked at the watch and got delighted that I would meet you in next 1 hour. I reached the airport around 7:15 and realized that I forgot 2 things. First, I did not bring any warm clothes and it was raining and very cold at the airport and I got worried that you will feel uncomfortable in such weather. Second, I did not bring anything to eat and you would be hungry after 7 hours of journey.

  

I quickly grabbed some chocoloates and drink. In the horizon I could see a flight descending on the runway and soon I got the news that Air India flight has landed. Oh! I was pacing up and down outside the arrival gate. I was elated seeing you at the airport. Welcome to Mussorie !!

  

The 2 hour drive in the cab was amazing. As usual your tantrums of not eating started (which I love BTW). Although you had made wild plans over the phone about the activities that you will do in the cab which like a true gentleman I had resisted vehemently. 

  

It was lovely when you rested your head on my shoulders. The touch of fresh and soft skin is sooooo comfortable and soothing. It's just inexplicable. I want time to halt and let that moment continue foreover. You are like an angel and caring for you is the best thing in this world. 

  

Now it was time for my wild plan to have bath together. But being a conservative person I let that plan go. Oh ! I love it when I ask you to come sit beside me and you refuse making such cute face. At that moment I want to hold your face and kiss you.

  

Here are 3 songs for you.

  

1)

You're the light, you're the night

You're the color of my blood

You're the cure, you're the pain

You're the only thing I wanna touch

Never knew that it could mean so much, so much !

  

2)

Aane wala pal jaane wala hai, ho sake to ismein zindagi bita lo, pal ye jo jaane wala hai.

  

3)

Saame ye kaun aaya dil me hui halchal, dekh ke bas ek hi jhalak ho gaye hum paagal .. 

  

Ila, the sight of your face is always in front my eyes. Your eyes are just fantastic and your expression where you try to look annoyed is priceless. I want to hug you, kiss you and spend the rest of life with you.

  

I will love you and take care of you forever. I will redress whatever big or small complaint you have with me. My life starts and stops with you. It's dedicated to take care of you. 

  

to be continued ....................................................... :)