---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Bihar Tenancy Act

**Preliminary**

**Areas excluded from BT Act?**

The act does not extend to Municipal and Cantonment area.

  

**What is Estate?**

Revenue paying and revenue free lands, includes Govt Khas Mahal

  

**Who is a Proprietor?**

Person owning whether in trust or for his own benefit an estate.

  

Who is a Tenant?

Who holds land under another person and is, or but for a special contract would be liable to pay rent for that land to that person

  

Who is a Landlord?

A person immediately under whom a tenant holds and includes Government

  

What is an Agricultural Year?

Where the Bengali year prevails, the year commencing on the first day of Baisakh, where the Fasli or Amli year prevails, the year commencing on the first day of Asin.

  

What is the meaning of Personal Cultivation?

1. By own labour
2. Labour of any member of one's family which consists of tenant, his her spouse and their sons and unmarried daughter.
3. Hired labour or by servants on wages payment in cash or kind but not in crop share

  

**Classes of Tenants**

**What are the classes of Tenant? (Section 4)**

1. Tenure Holder, under tenure-holder
2. Raiyats : holding at fixed rates, occupancy raiyats, non-occupancy raiyats.
3. Under-raiyat

  

**Define Tenure Holder (Section 5)**

A person who has acquired from proprietor right to hold for collecting rent or bringing it another cultivation by establishing tenants on it and includes successors.

  

**Define Raiyat (Section 5)**

A person who has acquired a right to hold land for the purpose of cultivating it by himself or by members of his family, hired servants.

  

A person is not raiyat unless he holds land immediately under a proprietor or immediately under a tenure holder.

  

_Where the area held by tenant exceeds 100 bighas the tenant = tenure holder._

**Tenure Holders**

**Discuss provisions related to enhancement of rent**

1. A tenure holder can't enhance the rent unless there is some local custom that supports such enhancement, or he has to now pay more rent and the land is capable of affording it.
2. The rate of enhancement will be limited either through local custom or determined by court. He should be left with atleast 10% of balance from gross rents payable to him and expense of collecting them.
3. The improvements made by tenure holder should be taken into account.
4. If the tenure holder himself has made a grant of portion, or occupies any portion of land then rent of that shall be calculated.
5. Court can order gradual enhancement
6. Rent once enhanced may not be altered for 15 years.

  

**Discuss provisions related to transfer of permanent tenure**

Should be mandatorily registered.

**Discuss provisions related to sale of permanent tenure**

  

**Discuss provisions related to succession of permanent tenure**

Notice has to be given to collector. There is bar to recovery of rent, pending notice of succession. 

  

**Raiyats holding at fixed rates**

**Transfers of tenures and holdings and landlord's registration fees**

**Occupancy Raiyats**

**Non-occupancy Raiyats**

**Under Raiyats**

**Restriction on alienation of land by Protected Tenants**

**Settlement of Waste Lands**

**General provisions as to Rent**

**Miscellaneous Provisions as to Landlord and Tenants**

**Record of Rights and Settlement of Rents**

**Judicial Procedure for the recovery of rent by suit**