# RoFR Work

**Survey Form**

[Podu Land Survey (1).pdf](../files/283341fa-ae71-4c98-ac36-a15060f70551.pdf)

[Supreme Court Case](https://theprint.in/judiciary/eight-states-tell-supreme-court-they-wrongly-rejected-claims-of-tribals-over-forest-land/291041/)

1. First meeting of FRCs to be conducted by 30.09.2022
2. Habitation wise Beat Officer incharge list.
3. Mapping of Panchayat Secretary and Beat Officer. Whether the Panchayat Secretary knows who is the Beat Officer of his GP
4. In which places the survey would be required.
5. Tea, Lunch etc to be arranged at Village Level in coordination with Sarpanch, Ward members.
6. Once we start the survey, it will not stop until all claims are exhausted.

## **ROFR Act**

- Read about the Act first.
- Line by line should be read.

## **Supreme Court Judgment**

The Act says the reasons for rejecting the claims need to be communicated in writing to the claimant, following which the claimant can appeal against it in the sub-divisional level committee within 60 days.

  

Asked the state governments to explain why the claims were rejected and whether all the evidence was examined before rejecting them.

## **How to Plan Survey**

1. Involve FRC members. They should play an active role in the mobilization of the applicants.
2. Take a big chart and mark the locations where the claims have been filed.
3. Every day you must know where are you going to do survey the next day. Plan for doing **20** survey every day.
4. Mandal wise availability of device.
5. How many devices are functional.
6. Focus on completing the survey in those habitations where the claims are less. This will free up the man power Panchayat Secretary and FBO who can be utilized for survey in other villages.

## **Survey Process**

1. Whether the PS are using GPS Camera or not ?
2. Whether Latitude & Longitude are captured by the device or not.
3. Has the field training given to FBOs regarding usage of the device.

## **Mandal Level Coordination**

1. Mandal Revenue Officer will act as the nodal officer.
2. Concerned FDO and FRO will coordinate.
3. Have 20 minutes review at Mandal level daily in the evening.
4. _Failing to Plan is Planning to Fail._

## **DPO**

1. Deputation of Panchayat Secretaries to Panchayats like Tadicherla, Mahamutharam where more than 800 claims have been received after 16th October.

## **CEO ZP**

1. Ensure active participation of all MPDOs

  

## **Mandal Special Officer**

1. Maintain Headquarters.
2. Coordinate with Mandal Level Team.
3. Visit 1 habitation daily.
4. Logistic and Manpower Management: Devices, Forms, Registers, PS and FBOs
5. Scan and send all reports.

  

## **MPOs & MPDOs**

  

1. Ensure that they are in the field by **7 AM.** If you start the survey work at 11 AM the work will not happen.
2. The faster they complete the work, the earlier they will be relieved from this work.

## **Reporting**

1. Responsibility of MRO to ensure that proper and correct reporting is done.
2. 15 members per habitation.
3. Check the data before sending.  Don't send the data blindly.
4. For example, phone number (10 digits undali)
5. There is a district level ROFR Cell.

## **Issues**

1. Physical applications collected but online entry not done. Make a list of all such applications - habitation wise. Their data entry would be done at the later stage.
2. Physical forms not collected at all. Nothing can be done at this point.
3. Some of the names in PDF are not found while doing verification. There is no such person in the village.