# 16-09-2022 - Rally Programme

**Convergence Point - 1:** SHG Members from Ghanpur and other villages

**Convergence Point - 2:** Municipality staff

**Convergence Point - 3:** Students

  

**Main Convergence Point:** Ambedkar Statue

  

Ambedkar Statue -> Ambedkar Stadium

  

The time for rally is **11:00 AM**

## **Mobilization**

1. Have we informed all Sarpanches to participate ?

**75** Bike at the front.

## **Per Convergence Point**

1. Drinking water facility - who is looking after ?
2. There is one packet biscuit for every participant.
3. Distribution of flags - who is looking after ?
4. Band
5. Artists at the convergence point
6. DJ
7. Police Bandobast at 3 convergence point
8. A tent at the convergence point
9. Distribution **of tokens** at these points. Who is going to distribute ?
10. Public Address System.

## **Buses Parking**

1. How many buses ?
2. From which area ?

# **Toilets**

1. Information regarding Toilets should be told to all the participants before hand.

## **Compering**

1. Samuel Garu will do.
2. Minute to minute program of what is to be done by whom.

## **Flag Hoisting**

1. Who is putting the flag.
2. Guard of Honour.

## **National Anthem**

1. Whether the song is loaded or not.

## **Main Dias**

1. Seating arrangements
2. Water Bottle
3. Dry fruits.

## **Main Dias Cultural Programme**

1. Sequence of events.

# **Food Counters**

# Nodal Officer who ?

1. Ensure that drinking water is reached for all the counters.
2. Ensure that Plastic Glasses are there.
3. Ensure that Counter Number is displayed prominently.
4. Ensure that the Participants have an idea regarding their Counter Numbers.
5. Ensure that plates, small cups and **spoons** are available in sufficient quantity.
6. Napkins, Handwash for VIP.
7. Officers Counters.
8. Counpons should be collected.
9. (2) Officers at Counters.
10. Food tini ekkada pedtaru.

  

## **SHG Mobilization**

1. Per Bus one person should be there from the DRDO Office for mobilization.
2. The buses will leave at around 08:30 from Bhupalpally. By that time they should be there.
3. The lunch should be over by 1:30 for all.

  

## **Big Flag**

1. Intermediate Education Officer.

  

# **Food**

1. Quality of all food items should be checked thoroughly.