---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# ADR, Civil Legal Remedies

  

**ADR**

**Meaning?**

The process of resolving disputes in place of litigation and includes arbitration, mediation, conciliation and Judicial settlements through Lok Adalats.

  

- National Legal Mission to reduce average pendency time from 15 years to 3 years.
- Article 39 (A) - provide free legal aid and Article 14 and 22 (1) ensures equality before law.
- To ensure that justice is not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disability.
- Statutory recognition under : CPC, Arbitration and Conciliation Act (1996), Legal Services Authorities Act (2002)

  

**Advantage**

- Alternative to the Formal Legal System.
- Any time, reduce the number of issues.
- Expeditious and less cost.
- Promote creative and realistic business solutions.
- Not governed by rigorous rules and procedure.
- With or without lawyer.
- Reduction of work load on courts.
- Win - win situation.
- No appeal lies - reduces the work of appellate courts.

  

**Section 89 of CPC**

- Provides for Arbitration, Conciliation, Judicial Settlement and Mediation.
- Reference is by mutual consent.
- Court should reformulate the terms of settlement. Judicial settlement by another judge.
- Time for ADR - a week to two months.

  

**Legal Services Authorities Act**

- Free legal services to the weaker sections of the society.
- Organize Permanent Lok Adalats
- Promote justice on the basis of equal opportunity.
- Section 12 enables : member of a SC / ST, trafficking, woman or child, mentally ill, industrial workman
- There is National Legal Services Authority, State, District and Taluk level.

  

**Arbitration**

- Neutral 3rd party renders decision.
- All disputes of civil or quasi civil nature can be referred e.g Property, right to hold office, non fulfilment of clause of contract, disputes in partnership (CPOP)
- Arbitration agreement --> court referral to arbitration --> appointment of arbitrator --> submission of statement --> proceedings --> arbitral award.

  

**Conciliation**

- Adjustment and settlement of disputes in friendly manner.
- The proceedings starts when one party makes a written request to other. The other party must accept the request within 30 days.
- Contractual, matrimonial, breach of contract, commerical disputes and all disputes arising out of legal relationship.
- Reduce the extent of differences and to arrive at amicable settlement.
- There is no agreement for arbitration. The conciliator only brings parties together and tries to solve the dispute. He has no authority to give any award.
- There may be a written settlement agreement. If the settlement agreement is signed by both the parties and conciliator then it has the same status and effect as arbitral award.

  

**Mediation**

- Half way between conciliation and arbitration.
- Assist the parties reach their own negotiated settlement and may make suggestions as appropriate.
- Identify matters of concern, develop better understanding of situation, develop mutually acceptable proposals.
- Has no power to decide.
- Conciliator can make proposals for settlements, formulate, reformulate the terms while mediator merely facilitate a settlement between parties.

  

  

**Civil Legal Remedies**

_Ubi jus ibi remedium -_ (There is no wrong without remedy).

  

Specific Relief Act

- A particular relief to which a person is entitled in the first instance as distinguished from compensatory relief.
- It's available only for the purpose of enforcing individual civil rights and not for penal law.

  

Objectives

- Claim compensation
- Claim damages
- Injunction
- Declaratory Relief

  

Reliefs Available

- Restoration of possession. Immovable property. In case of dispossessions. Recovery of specific movable property.
- Specific performance of Contracts (non fulfillment = damages). Rule of Equity i.e enforce whole contract. Exceptions exist when the part unperformed is small and it is compensated. Contracts cannot be enforced when the compensation in money is adequate, involves personal service, under arbitration or supervision of the court.
- Injunction: Order by which individual is required to perform, or is restrained from performing a particular act.

    - Preliminary or temporary injuctions.
    - Preventive injunctions - status quo.
    - Mandatory injunctions - specific performance.
    - Permanent injunctions - pollution / blasting.
- Declatory Relief : Declaration of status or right. Parties not clear about rights or duties. Rectification of instruments (mutual mistake of the parties), rescission (undoing of a thing, ab initio), cancellation of instruments (cancel void or voidable contract).

  

**Non - enforceability**

- Not entitled to recover compensation.
- Incapable of performing contracts.
- Not ready and willing to perform the contract.