# 25 January

We reached Surat in the morning. There were atleast more than 10 district officials to receive us. For the first time I saw the fantastic provision of ramp at railway station where we did not have to lift our luggage over cumbersome staircases. The concept can be easily replicated elsewhere.

  

Our accomodation was at the Circuit House. The first reaction on seeing it was simply Wow! It's an amazingly beautiful and spacious house and resembles a very good hotel.

  

Surat is one of the cleanest cities in India. However, it was not always like this. In 1994 it witnessed a plague outbreak. However, it was a blessing in disguise as it offered a golden opportunity for the administration to completely change the landscape of the city. The work done by the visionary Municipal Commissioner of that time Mr. Rao is still remembered today. He is a source of inspiration for all of us.

  

We first made a visit to Solid Waste handling facility. Surat is divided into 7 zones and there is a door to door collection of waste. However, there is no segregation at source. The entire waste is brought to transfer plant where it is compacted and then dispatched to the landfill sites. PPP model is followed for waste collection. The route, weight and movement of trucks is tracked online and it's a completely computerised system.

  

We then had an attachment with the Water Supply Board. Surat receives its water from Tapi river. The river is prone to floods every 4 years. The city has developed a sophisticated system for water supply. It was established as early as 1897 and today it caters to more than 95 per cent of the city. There is a rigourous water quality checks mechanism in place and the entire process is monitored and controlled through SCADA system. Surat is a fast expanding city and its population is likely to cross 1 crore in next 10 years. Therefore, the water department has already developed mechanisms to provide water to such a large population.

  

To control floods the administration has come up with a unique idea of creating a reservoir in the city which holds excess supply from the upstream Ukai Dam. The reservoir is separated from Arabian sea by an embankment. In normal situation the water from river and Arabian sea don't mix. However, during monsoons the water from reservoir is allowed to spill over and mix with the sea water. This is quite an effective way to handle floods.

  

We were next taken to Biomedical Waste Treatment unit. It handles biomedical waste from whole of Surat. It is also based on PPP model. The cost of treatment is 10 Rs per tonne. The waste is first segregated into Red and Yellow category at source level. The waste is then either incinerated or autoclaved and then shredded based on their color coding. Thus it's quite a safe system to handle such toxic materials.

  

We then visited the sewage treatment plant. We were shown all the stages of waste treatment here. There are mainly three stages viz. Preliminary, Primary, Secondary and Tertiary. In the preliminary stage all the big and floating particles are removed from the water. In the primary stage it goes through anaerobic process from which methane gas is generated. The gas is further used for generating electricity through which more than 70% electricity requirement of the plant is met. In the secondary stage it goes through aerobic process. The tertiary stage involves the use of physical and chemical process. The water that comes out after tertiary treatment is better than the packaged drinking water! We also tasted the water and marvelled at the miracles of science. Unfortunately due to social and religious mindset of people the water cannot be used for drinking purposes. It was surprising to know that cities like Singapore meets its drinking water requirement through this process only. We also realized how difficult it is to bring change in a country like India where the people themselves are the biggest hurdle to the process of development. However, I was delighted to meet Naresh Patel who works at the plant. He has done his Masters in Chemistry. His sheer enthusiasm and passion about his work was heartening. We need more people like him to bring the change.

  

After a heavy and sumptous lunch we had our final interaction with the Surat Municipal Commissioner and the honourable Mayor. We were also briefed about the working of the Surat Municipal Corporation. Surat is the 8th largest city in India and it has the highest per household income in the country. SMC is doing a remarkable job here. We saw various e-governance initiatives. The SMC is the first municipal body to have a dedicated App and a virtual civic centre. All the goverrment services viz. birth, death, property etc. are available through App. The city plans to have a wifi zone all over the city. It is also coming up with BRTS system on the lines of Ahmedabad.

  

In the evening we were invited for dinner with the entire district administration. Thus it was quite an eventful day.