# 21 January

We reached Gandhidham at 5:30. We were put up in Fun n Food hotel. However, there was no fun in having breakfast as the service turned out be extremely lousy and slack. We then headed for Kandla port. For most of us it was our first brush with port and for me first experience of sea. We first met with the Transport Manager who briefed us about the Kandla port. Kandla port is the largest major port in India and last year it handled 95 Million Tonnes and this year it aims to surpass 100 MT. We were then taken around the port in a small ship. It was really an awesome experience. We saw coal, timber etc being unloaded. The port unlike major foreign ports is not mechanised. The challenges faced by Kandla port are as follows:

- Ship building and port industry is going through a tough time due to overall economic downturn. The cost of transportation is as low as 1/10th of what it used to be just 2 years ago.
- Kandla does not handle container cargo. It tried to go into PPP mode but things did not work out. It is planning afresh to start the container operation.
- It is a tidal port and the depth of the sea is only 12 m which means ships of only medium size can enter the port. To remain in the competition Kandla port has found an innovative idea of halting large ships in the mid of the ocean and then using small ships for unloading cargo.

We then visited Tuna Port which is constructed and operated by the Adani group. Adani group also manages Mundhra Project. It is a completely mechanised port and we were really surprised to know that only 30 people are required for the entire operation. The port is built through PPP mechanism and goverment gets 25% of Adani's share. Since time was short we could not visit the port facility.

  

We then headed for authentic Gujarati lunch. The lunch was delicious and wholesome. We then visited the Kandla port township and later met with the Vice Chairman Alok Singh an IRS officer of 1993 batch. We watched a short film followed by a PPT. After that there was a Q&A session with the vice chairman. He highlighted the strength and the challenges faced by the port.

  

In the evening Kandla Port officials hosted dinner for us at Radisson hotel. Overall it was a well spent day.