---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Law of Evidence

Indian Evidence Act (1872) tells us about: facts-in-issue, relevant facts, admissable facts, facts may be proved / disproved, who is to produce such evidence and how it is given. It is applicable before court. Not applicable in case of Administrative Tribunal, Arbitrators, Lok Adalat, Court Martial, Departmental Disciplinary Proceedings. 

  

**Witness?**

- A child aged 4 years is a wtiness.
- An accused cannot be compelled to be witness but he is a competent witness.
- Hostile witness is admissable but not given credence.
- Police officer is a competent witness.
- Relative / rival / enemy can be witness but given low priority.
- Wife cannot be compelled to disclose information made by spouse. Even if communication made by spouse is revealed voluntarily it cannot be taken on record by the court.

  

Evidence is a means and proof ends. It does not include arguments, opinions of witnesses. Principle governing burden of evidence is different in case of civil and criminal cases.

  

**Confession vs Admission**

Confession is acknowledgement of total guilt whereas admission is a statement of fact that tend towards proving guilt. They are not conclusive proof of the matter. Admission is used in civil matters whereas confession is used in criminal matters.

  

**Miscellaneous**

- Statements made under narco analysis and polygraph is not admissable in evidence.
- In Civil Cases the burden of proof on both the parties, in criminal cases it is on the prosecution.
- Evidence is inadmissable if it obtained through illegal means.
- Leading questions have answers in YES or NO. They cannot be asked during Chief examination.
- Expert opinion is evidence.

  

**Dying declaration**

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| English Law | Indian Law |
| made after cause of death arisen | \-do- |
| expectation of death | \-do- |
| maker believes that he would die | need not believe that he would die e.g Pakala Narayana Swamy vs Emperor (1937) case. |

**Methods of examination**

- Chief - Public Prosecutor
- Cross - Defence Counsel
- Re-exam - PP
- Re-cross - DC

  

**Categories of Evidence**

1. Real & Personal
- Real - producing person / cloth
- Personal

    - Oral

        - Given in court by witness (outside court not allowed)
        - Evidence given from personal knowledge (signs / gestures)
    - Documentary

        - Primary : original document
        - Secondary: as a matter of rule not admissable

3. Direct & Circumstantial
4. Original & Hearsay. Hearsay not admissable except dying declaration, confession, admission.
5. Substantive (even 1 item enough to give judgment) & Corroborative (even 10 items can't form the basis of judgment)