# Lecture 2

Grit, the ability to play the long game. What you do every single day is more important. Small daily act of optimisation.

  

BIW

  

Apple was formed in the garage.

  

Florence during the Renaissance age.

  

Michael Angelo. Sistine Chapel. Human possibility in action.

  

We all have that genius within us.

  

Fit into the box and think like everyone.

  

Where the victim sees failure the game changers see opportunity

  

Balance and World class can't go together. The person who chases two rabbits catches neither.

  

People succumbing to the seduction.

  

Tight bubble of total focus. Monomaniacal about few things.

  

Pick your battles and obsession.

  

Vital few.

  

We cannot be brilliant at every thing.

  

It's not about natural talent it's about doing the right thing.

  

Leaving the herd of average people start to hate them. Iconic. Develop a tough skin. As we change the world people would be threatened.

  

Leave circle of average. Become a game changer. Challenge the beliefs. Rise to the legendary level. Inspire millions of people.  
66 days of daily practice leads to automaticity.

  

Neuroplasticity.

1. Bravery Box. As soon as we hit the first hurdle we give up. Witness the resistance and say that Aha that's my fear. Dopamine in brain. Being a merchant of hope.
2. Small Win Theory. Bottom line is that keep a progress diary that record tiny wins. Release pharmacy of mastery in the brain. Burst of energy and confidence.
3. 10 / 3 rule. Consistency is the key to success. Every single morning who I want to become, the most optimistic person. Write it in journal 10 times. It writes on your unconscious mind. Don't fall into the addiction of victim speak. Don't be a complainer. You are your own worst enemy. Seduced by hypnosis of victim hood. The world would be better. Look in the mirror and repeat the phrase. Language of possibility. I AM statement ............. Leave people better than they find them. No idea works unless you start doing. Every master was once a beginner.
4. Get Sleep cycle right. As you begin the day. The person who sweats more bleeds less in the battlefield. The holy hour to prepare yourself. Key ritual.
5. Morning declaration. Words are so powerful. At the last hour I know that I have given my best. Instrument of success.
6. How they can make difference. Found some cause that fuels the passion. Fate of humanity. Steve Jobs.The number one driver of happy people is devotion to altruism. Acts of kindness were significantly happier. Happy people get great things done. 10x value obsession. How may I best serve the people. Smiling at people and finding good things in people.
7. 5 minute movie. Visualizers are peak performers. 5 minute meditation. Meditation releases ceretonin. Imagine yourself doing things that you want to achieve.
8. Get fit like professional athlete. BDNF. When we exercise grows new brain cells that have been damaged due to stress.

  
Always on fire. Now is the best time in the world.