---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# IPR & Cyber Laws

  

**IPR**

**What does IPR mean?**

**I -** skills

**P -** person has exclusive right

**R -** standard of permitted action by law.

  

**What are the forms of IPR?**

Patent, copyright, trademark, GI, Integ circ, indust des, trade secrets.

  

**Laws that regulate IPR regime in India?**

Patent (1970), Copyright (1957), Trade Marks (1999), Design Act (2001), Biological Div (2002)

  

**When is invention patentable?**

New, useful, not obvious, pertains to patentable subject matter, grant of patent is not barred.

  

**Copyright?**

Exclusive and assignable, given for a fixed number of years, To print, publish, perform, film artistic or muscial material (literary work, musical work, cinematograph, sound recording, photograph, computer work).

Time limit for copyright is 60 years.

  

**Trademarks?**

sign, words, drawing, pictures, shape of goods.

  

**Industrial Designs?**

Features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament of composition of lines or colours applied to any article. The design must be applied to article, through an industrial process.

  

**Integrated Circuits?**

Valid for 10 years.

  

**Geographical Indicators?**

Identifies any goods as originating in a country or territory where a given quality, reputation or other char is essentially attributable to their geographic origin. Kolhapuri Chappal, Assam Black Tea.

  

A group right and not individual.

  

**Protection of undisclosed information?**

Under law of tort, recipient uses the information for own purposes e.g customers list, secret recipes. 

  

  

**Cyber Laws**

More devices than people. By 2020 there will be 50 billion devices. Industrial economy to knowledge economy.

  

3 problems:

Borderless nature: no connection with physical address,  anonymity, nature of information.

  

Challenges of:

Ownership, freedom of expression, liability.

  

Advantages:

Anonymity, no immediate physical risk, lag between action and detention, legitimate tools, prevention expensive.

  

Legal recognition of contracts through electronic means etc. Protection of personal data, consumer protection, intellectual property.

  

Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and IT Act, 2000.

- Law applicable to any kind of information.
- Technology neutral.
- Enabling: use of electronic records & digital signatures.
- Facilitating: it facilitates e-gov & e-comm
- Regulatory: imposes civil and criminal sanction
- Accepts Digital Signatures.
- Cyber security and terrorism.
- Electronic surveillance, blocking & monitoring.
- Cyber Appellate Tribunal

  

Features

- Does not take citizenship into account.
- Section 67: Obscene information.
- Shreya Singhal vs Union of India.
- Section 66: computer related offences, identity theft, cheating by impersonation, cyber terrorism.
- Section 43: Civil offences; unauthorised access, downloading, copying or extracting, denial of access

  

Cyber crimes comprises of cyber contravention and cyber offences.