---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# IPC - Offences Against Property

**Offences Against Property**

378 - Theft

Dishonestly, movable property out of possession without consent

  

383 - Extortion

Intentionally puts any person in fear of injury, dishonestly induces to deliver to any person any property or valuable security

  

390 - Robbery

Either theft or extortion

The offender voluntarily causes death, hurt or wrongful restraint, fear of instant death or instant hurt, wrongful restraint

  

391 - Dacoity

Five or more persons, commit or attempt to commit robbery.

  

403 - Misappropriation of property

Dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable property

  

405 - Criminal breach of trust

Whoever entrusted with property dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use or dishonestly uses or disposes that property in violation of law.

  

415 - Cheating

Deceiving any person, fraudently or dishonestly induces the person to deliver any property, to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, reputation or property.

  

416 - Cheating by personation

  

425 - Mischief

Intent to cause or knowing that likely to cause wrongful loss or damage to the public or any person, causes destruction of any property or destroys or diminishes its value or utility or affects its injuriously

  

431 - Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel.

  

441 - Criminal Trespass

Enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person.

Having lawfully entered unlawfully remains to do above.

  

442 - House Trespass

Criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place of worship or as a place for the custody or property.

  

445 - House Breaking

House trespass if he effects his entrance into the house, or if, being in house for the purpose of committing an offence he quits the house

1. Passage made by himself
2. Scaling or climbing over any wall or building
3. Passage which he has opened which was not intended by occupier of the house to be opened
4. Opening any lock
5. Effects his entrance by using criminal force or committing assault
6. Passage known to have been fastened against such entrance and to have been unfastened by himself

  

463 : Forgery

  

464 : Making false document

  

489-A : Counterfeiting currency notes or bank notes.

489-B :  Using counterfeit

489-C : Possessing counterfeit.

  

494 : Marrying again

497 : Adultery

  

498-A: Husband or relative of a husband subjecting to cruelty

  

499 - Defamation

  

511 : Punishment for attempting to commit offence. 

One half of imprisonment. A pick pocket finding nothing, empty jewellery box