# Singareni - Issues

## Chittari Laxmaiah Case

Kindly peruse the reference cited and submit that the Revenue Divisional Officer, Bhupalpally has informed that, the General Manager has revealed that **Sri Chittari Laxmaiah**, his family and others are frequently obstructing the mining operation and threatening to commit suicide by consuming pesticide by stating that their land is already covered in both P.N. and Declaration and compensation was not get disbursed and requested to arrange to pass award for the land of Ac. 1-30 ½ gts in favor of Chittari Laxmaiah and others at an earliest for smooth running of KTK OC-III Project.

  

In this regard, the Revenue Divisional Officer, Bhupalpally has submitted that there is a dispute of enjoyment in respect of Sy. No. 318/93 & 318/131 of Dharmaraopet village. The names of Chittari Laxmaiah and others are published as enjoyers in Sy. No. 318/93 where as the pattedar of Sy. No. 318/93 has strongly objected to their enjoyment and requested time and again for re-enjoyment.

  

Accordingly, re-enjoyment has been conducted and in the re- enjoyment Chittari Laxmaiah and others are shown **as enjoyers in Sy. No. 318/131**. In order to pass the award in survey No. 318/131 in favor of Chittari Laxmaiah and others there is no balance land left over in Sy. No. 318/131 more over the pattedar of Sy. No. 318/93 namely Smt. Shashirekha, W/o Ramchandra reddy has already filed W.P.No. 1007/2023. The Hon'ble High Court in its order dated 06-05-2023 has passed orders that interim order granted earlier shall stand extended until further orders and also case posted on 03-07-2023.

  

The Revenue Divisional Officer, Bhupalpally has discussed the above issue with the General Manager, SCCL, Bhupalpally and it was concluded that in order to settle this chronic issue there is no other way except to revise sethwar extent excess by Ac. 1-30½ gts. in Sy. No. 318/131

  

In view of the above, the Revenue Divisional Officer, Bhupalpally has requested permission to address the A.D. S& LRS for extension of Ac. 1-30½ gts in Sy.No.318/131 so as to settle this chronic issue and for smooth running of KTK OC-III project.

  

Hence, this file is submitted for kind perusal and further orders sir.