---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Delegated Legislation

When the function of legislation is entrusted to other organs.

  

**Reasons?**

- Pressure upon parliament, technical nature, flexibility.
- Emergency = when quick action required.
- Complexities of modern admin (necessary to give wide powers to authorities)

  

Statue enacted by legislature is Parent Act (Primary Law) and rules, regulations, byelaws, orders etc are known as subordinate laws.

  

Sub-delegation - delegation to another subordinate authority or agency e.g Essential Commodities Act.

- Cannot sub-delegate to officers below a rank specified in the parent act.
- Cannot go beyond the power conferred.
- If some conditions are imposed which must be compiled then those must be fulfilled otherwise becomes ultra vires.

  

Must be published or promulgated in some suitable manner whether such publication is prescribed in parent act or not.

  

**Functions which can be delegated?**

- Commencement of an Act
- Supplying details - Section 3 of AIS (1951) authorises the Govt to make rules to regulate conditions of service in the AIS
- Inclusion & Exclusion - extend the provisions to different territories, persons or commodities.
- Suspension
- Adopt and apply statutes existing in other states.
- Prescribing punishments

    - Legislature must determine maximum punishment
    - The exercise of power must be subject to the previous sanction or subsequent approval.
- Power to frame rules, bye-laws, regulations etc. They must be laid before the legislature.
- Make necessary changes to remove difficulties. Removal of difficulties to modify even the parent act (Henry VIII clause). As a matter of rule it is not allowed.

  

**Functions which cannot be delegated?**

- Essential legislative functions cannot be delegated. Legislative policy must be laid down by the legislature itself.
- Repeal of Law.
- Modify the Act in its important aspects.
- Retrospective operation
- Ouster of jurisdiction of the courts.
- Making of a particular act into an offence is an essential legislative function
- Imposing tax.

  

**Judicial Review**

- Enabling Act is ultra vires the constitution.
- The administrative legislation is ultra vires the constitution.
- The admin legislation is ultra vires the enabling act / conflict / prescribed procedure.
- The DL is in excess of power conferred by the enabling Act.
- Unreasonable, arbitrary and discriminatory.