# RSR Issue - Missing Survey Number

In many cases the MROs are rejecting the applications for Patta lands even though

  

1. The person is having Old PPBs
2. The name of the person is reflected in Pahanis till 2017-18

  

MRO generally cites the issue of **RSR Exceeding** as one of the reason. However, one needs to be careful while arriving at conclusion.

  

**CASE STUDY**

Survey No. **52** has extent of **4 Acres.** Before the implementation of LRUP, **Mr. A & Mr. B** were pattedars of the land as shown below:

  

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Survey Number** | **Pattedar** | **Extent** |
| 52/A | Mr. A | 2.00 |
| 52/B | Mr. B | 2.00 |
|     | **Total** | **4.00** |

However, during the implementation of LRUP only Mr. A got the new PPB and Mr. B did not get PPB and Sy No. 52/B also is missing from Dharani. Further,  it is found that some unknown persons **Mr. C** has also entered into our records but his Khata is **unsigned.**

The current status of Survey No. 52 is as follows:

|     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Survey Number** | **Pattedar** | **Extent** | **Khata Status** |
| 52/A | Mr. A | 2.00 | Signed. PPB Issued |
| 52/C | Mr. C | 2.00 | Unsigned. Mr. C doesn't have any record related to this Sy. No. |
|     | **Total** | **4.00** |     |

**TM-33 APPLICATION**

Now, Mr. B has applied under Missing Survey Number module.

  

If we strictly go ahead with RSR Extent criteria then we find that Pahani Extent (Mr. A + Mr. C) = 4 Acres and RSR Extent = 4 Acres and in case of accepting the application the Pahani Extent would become **6 Acres.**

However, we need to keep in mind that:

1. **Present Digitally Signed Extent = 2 Acres** (As Mr. C is not eligible for DS)
2. After accepting the application of Mr. B, the **total signed extent = 4 Acres** (Mr. A and Mr. B)

  

It's the **Total Digitally Signed Extent that is important** and not the total extent entered in Pahani as many of these survey numbers are fictitious and not eligible anyway for Digitally Signed.