# 18 January

We were in for a delightful surprise at the breakfast table. There were simply too many healthy and delicious items to eat but due to paucity of time could not eat much. However, we resolved to come half an hour early next morning to make full utilisation of the hotel facilities.

  

We had our first attachment with Space Application Centre ISRO. The SAC was set up the visionary Vikram Sarabhai. It is responsible for all the research, testing and assembly work for satellites launched by ISRO. We were first briefed by the HR head about ISRO and its glorious history. Then we had a small sessions on Communication and Navigation Satellites, their need and how these are fulfilling the burgeoning demands for high definition TV and fast internet. The most interesting presentation was on the Remote Sensing Satellites where we were mighty impressed with the spectrum that its uses covers. ISRO is planning to put the data in the public domain through the internet.

Then we visited the Electronics unit and were shown around the chip assembly unit. The head of the lab told us that ISRO has successfully produced Gallium Arsenic based semiconductor chips in India. Earlier it used to cost in excess of 1.5 crore but now it can be produced at 35 lakhs. The chip has been employed in the Moon Orbiter Mission.

After the lunch it was time to say goodbye to ISRO and I was really amazed to see the kind of sophisticated work done by the organization.

  

Next we visited the Gandhi Ashram. We saw the rooms where Gandhji, Kasturba Gandhi and Vinoba Bhave once used to live. The ashram is located on the banks of Sabarmati river and it's really quite serene and calm place to be. We also bought some merchandise from the souvenior shop.