---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Performance Evaluation

[http://betterevaluation.org/approach/realist\_evaluation](http://betterevaluation.org/approach/realist_evaluation)

Behaviour and results are two critical elements of performance. It includes activities which ensure that goals are consistently being met in an effective and efficient manner.

  

Pawson & Tilley : O = f(context, mechanism)

Context matters: firstly, it influences ‘reasoning’ and, secondly, generative mechanisms can only work if the circumstances are right. There may different social beliefs about the roles and responsibilities of mothers and fathers in different cultures, which may affect how parents respond to the parenting programme. Whether parents can put their new learning into practice will depend on a range of factors – perhaps the time they have available, their own beliefs about parenting, or their mental health. Finally, the context may provide alternative explanations of the observed outcomes.

  

Focus on Performance Management is a concomitant of NPM. It focused on inducting improved measures. Creation of independent agencies required objective assessment of performance.

  

PE in Principal - Agent Scenario:

- Both statistical and behavioral
- What gets measured eventually becomes important - issue of targets
- Focus on statistical outliers and ignore those _"hiding in the pack"_
- Fail to capture key dimensions of effectiveness

  

Gaming

- Ratchet Effect - perverse incentive to set low targets and not to exceed them even if they can
- Threshold Effect - sub-optimal outcomes by better performers to crowd towards target.
- Output distortion - hitting the target and missing the point. 

  

Loss of provider morale as an outcome of naming and shaming

  

Goal displacement where performance measures supersede actual outcomes. It may lead to improvement in numbers without improvement in outcomes.

  

**Result Framework Document (RFD) in GoI**

1. What are main objectives
2. What actions are proposed
3. How to determine progress in implementing these objectives.

  

Why PM?

- What gets measured, gets done
- measure results -> see success -> reward -> win public support.

  

The individual goals and achievement must be in sync with larger organizational goals.