# DAO Showcause

  

Reference:

1. Hon’ble Chief Minister Instructions during the meeting held with District Collectors on 25-05-2023
2. Chief Secretary instructions during video conference on 29-05-2023
3. GAD Memo No 275/Poll.B/2023 Dated 28-05-2023

  

Whereas the Telangana Government has decided to celebrate the **Telangana Rashtra Dashabdi Utsavalu** in a befitting and grand manner across the state for 21 days and on 3rd June **Raithu Dinotsavam** has to be celebrated in all Rythu Vedikas in the district.

  

Whereas Hon’ble Minister for Tribal Welfare & WCD had convened a meeting of all district officials on 30-05-2023 @ 3 PM to review the arrangements for the 21 days celebration.

  

Whereas the Agriculture Department has to play the most important role during the celebration of Dashabdalu Utsavalu as there are many welfare schemes being implemented for the welfare of the farmers in the state.

  

Whereas the instructions have been earlier issued by the undersigned that except medical emergency the district officers should intimate information about their leave well in advance and leave the headquarters only after obtaining permission from the District Officer.

  

However, in violation of the above all instructions, it was found that Sri Vijay Bhaskar, District Agriculture Officer sent a Whatsapp Message to District Collector on **30-05-2023 @ 08:38 AM** as follows:

  

“_Sir_

_Good morning sir._

_I am going to Delhi to assist my son in his admission process at Metro hospital faridabad sir._

_I will be back by 31st night sir”_

The District Agriculture Officer boarded the flight to Delhi at **11:45 AM on 30-05-2023** which means that by the time he sent the message to the undersigned he had already left the headquarters and was at the airport.

  

Therefore, District Agriculture Officer is Showcaused and instructed to submit his explanation for:

  

- Leaving the Headquarter without permission of the District Collector.
- Skipping the meeting convened by Hon’ble District Incharge Minister without prior permission.
- Messaging about his absence from the meeting after reaching the airport.
- Disobeying the earlier issued instructions by the undersigned regarding intimation of leave well in advance in case of non-medical reasons.

  

The District Agriculture Officer is instructed to submit his explanation within 24 hours of receiving this memo failing which disciplinary action will be initiated against him under the provisions of Andhra Pradesh Civil Services Conduct Rules