---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Angular

  

```
npm install -g @angular/cli
```

  

```
ng new todo --routing=false --style=css
```

  

```
ng serve
```

  

A component in Angular is made up of three main parts—the template, styles, and the class.

  

Components are the building blocks of an Angular application. A component includes a TypeScript class that has a @Component() decorator.

  

You use the @Component() decorator to specify metadata (HTML template and styles) about a class.

  

```
<h1>{{ title }}</h1>
```

  

You accomplish sharing data between Angular components with special decorators called @Input() and @Output(). You use these decorators to specify that certain properties allow data to go into or out of a component. To use @Output(), you raise an event in one component so that the other component knows that there is data available.

  

```
ng generate component item
```

  

\*ngIf, a built-in Angular directive that you can use to dynamically change the structure of the DOM

  

The template variable, #editedItem

  

@Input(), @Output(), and EventEmitter facilitate communication between your two components. An @Input() serves as a doorway for data to come into the component, and an @Output() acts as a doorway for data to go out of the component. An @Output() has to be of type EventEmitter, so that a component can raise an event when there's data ready to share with another component

  

Note: The ! in the class's property declaration is called a definite assignment assertion. This operator tells Typescript that the item and newItem inputs are always initialized and not undefined, even when TypeScript cannot tell from the constructor's definition. If this operator is not included in your code and you have strict TypeScript compilation settings, the app will fail to compile.

  

the <ng-template>, which we've named elseBlock, with the syntax #elseBlock, shows instead of the <span>. You can use Angular's <ng-template> when you don't want content to render by default

  

Services are a great way to share information among classes that don't know each other.

  

The @Injectable() decorator accepts a metadata object for the service, the same way the @Component() decorator did for your component classes.

  

Reserve the constructor for minimal initialization such as wiring constructor parameters to properties. The constructor shouldn't do anything. It certainly shouldn't call a function that makes HTTP requests to a remote server as a real data service would.

  

```
ng generate module app-routing --flat --module=app
```

  

```
import { HttpClient, HttpHeaders } from '@angular/common/http';
```