# Industrial Revolution, Socialism, Imperialism

INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

  

**Factors Responsible for IR?**

1. There was a collapse of feudal system. Along with renaisssance this infused new life into economy and society.
2. The period saw tremendous growth in science and technology.
3. Growth of population led to increasing demand. Existing techniques were not sufficient to meet the demands and hence there was a need to find efficient modes of production. The dictum _Necessity is the Mother of Invention_ could never have been more true than during IR.
4. Due to brave efforts by sailors new colonies and world trade routes were discovered. Queen Elizabeth I started the official policy of settlement in North America which finally gave birth to 13 colonies.

**Why England dominated and not other countries?**

1. England enjoyed a stable political system.
2. It had a strong navy and shipbuilding industry.
3. Large empire. A popular saying went that _"Sun never sets in British Empire"_
4. It had abundant natural resources which provided raw materials for its industries.
5. Colonies served as ready made market for its goods. Import duties on British goods were abolished while export duties on native goods were raised. 
6. It was the birthplace of many scientific discoveries and technogies. It had a progressive attitude towards science. There were organisations like Royal Society of London focused on R & D.
7. Enclosure Movement led to eviction of small farmers which led to increased labour supply in cities.

**What were the major Scientific discoveries?**

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Field | Inventor | Technology |
| Textile | Hargreaves | Developed machine which speeded up spinning |
| Textile | Arkwright | He adapted Hargreaves' machine for running with water |
| Textile | Crompton | He combined the advantages of machine made by both |
| Textile | Cartwright | He developed power loom |
| Textile | El Whitney | He developed Cotton Gin which separted seeds from cotton threads at 300 times faster speed. |
| Industry | James Watt | Developed Steam Engine in 1769 |
| Industry |     | Development of blast furnace and textile industry (counter rising imports from India) |
| Transport | George Stephenson | Steam engine to haul coal from mines to port by railways. |
| Transport | Mc Adam | Pucca Road (Macadamized Roads) |
| Transport |     | First passenger and freight service from Liverpool to Manchester |
| Transport |     | Canal building in Europe and US |
| Transport | Robert Fulton | Use of steam boats. |
| Communication | Rawland Hill | Penny Post and Postage Stamp |
| Communication | Graham Bell | Telephone |
| Communication | Samuel Morse | Telegraph |
| Communication | Marconi | Wireless communication |
| Agriculture |     | Cash crops, steel plough and harrow, mechanical drill for seeding, intensive manuring and crop rotation. |
| Research |     | Royal Society of London |

  

  

**Role of Industrial revolution in other countries?**

- France: It had unstable political sytem and there was wide unrest among people. The situation therefore was not conducive for industrial advancement. By 1850 it was the second largest producer of iron, but it was far behind than England.
- Germany : It was a latecomer as it had to wait till its unification in 1870. But after it it made rapid progress and became the main rival of Britain.
- Japan : It was initially known only for silk, porcelain and toys. However, by the end of 19th century it became a global player in steel, machinery, metal goods and chemicals. It was the first country to industrialize in Asia
- USA:  It had abundant natural resources. It introduced machines and started factories even before 1800. It had well developed textile, steel and shoe industries.

**Discuss the Impact of industrialisation?**

Society

1. Feudal society transformed into Industrial Society
2. It also led to gross inequality. The British PM Disraeli spoke of _'existence of two nations in England - rich and the poor'_
3. Means of production were controlled by factory owners. Landless, toolless workers were now dependent on employer. He could be hired or fired at will and enjoyed no rights, job security or social benefits. Their plight is well illustrated by Charles Dickens in his novels. Their working conditions were deplorable and they lived in filthy conditions.
4. Emergence of new order which clashed with the old order. It gave new dimension to economy, polity, society, religion.

International

1. Race for new colonies started. This led to the policy of colonialism and imperialism.
2. Brought countries and people together. World became interconnected and growth of international consciousness took place.  The events in one part in the world affected another. For example, slowdown in England in 1830 led to the revolutions in other parts of Europe.

Economy

1. Emergence of Laissez Faire doctrine.
2. Centre of economy shifted from rural to urban areas, connection with land severed and the self sufficiency of village was broken.
3. Growth of trade, commerce, means of transportation, communication, banking.

Religion

1. Broke the monopoly of religion. It was relegated to private affair. 
2. Some country like France totally prohibited any show of religion in public affairs.

  

**What were the major features of capitalism?**

1. Goods and means of production owned by individual. There existed only two classes - Capitalists (owner) and worker. Worker only owned his wages and nothing else.
2. Market knows everything approach. Laissez Faire. Adam Smith.
3. No government intervention.
4. Hire and Fire policy at will.
5. Exploitation of workers. Miserable conditions.

**Major industrial reforms undertaken?**

1. Formation of trade union was allowed.
2. Factory Act was passed in 1802.
3. Restriction on number of hours for kids to 12. Later kids below 9 years of age could not be employed.
4. Chartist Movement was launched for the demand of right to vote for industrial workers. Earlier they were denied.
5. Socialist consciousness development. Reordering of social system.
6. State's role in regulating the economy also came to be realised.

  

RISE OF SOCIALISM

  

The greatest challenge to laissez faire or free market doctrine came from socialism which grew in the beginning as a reaction against evils of capitalism. The idea appealed to workers. A complete re-ordering of society was felt necessary. While recognising the importance of machines and making them even better it also aimed at solving the problems created by capitalism by building new social order.

  

Reasons for Growth

1. Vast majority of workers had no right. Their conditions of work were miserable and were fired and hired on according to the needs of the capitalists. They had no job security. There were laws against workers combining themselves.
2. Belief that capitalism is evil and the means of production should be owned by the society as a whole and not by a few individuals. This led to revulsion against inequality.
3. French revolution and its promise of equality had given new impetus to ideas. However, there was wide gap between aims of FR and the actual conditions after the revolution.

Trade Unions

1. Workers began to organise themselves into trade unions to protect the common rights.
2. Several countries passed laws to protect them from unsafe conditions and limit the number of working hours.
3. Movement to break the machines by Luddites led by Ned Ludd. They believed that destruction of machines would an end to their misery.
4. There was a Chartist Movement in Britain for political rights.

Babeuf's Conspiracy

Babeuf was born in 1760 and participated in French Revolution. He organised a secret body called Society of the Equals. He was executed in 1797 but his ideas influenced the growth of socialist movement.

  

"_Nature gave everyone an equal right to the enjoyment of all good. In a true society there is no room for either rich or poor. Time has come for republic of equals whose doors will be open for all"_

Other Socialists and Organisations

1. Saint-Simon (1760-1825) : He gave the slogan of "_from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs"_
2. Charles Fourier (1772-1837): He is credited with Utopian Socialism and ideas of Feminism.
3. Robert Owen (1771-1858)
4. Lous August Blanqui (1805-81) : He believed that through a revolutionary conspiracy, power could be captured to bring about socialism.
5. League of Just - It had members in many parts of Europe. Its motto was - _"All men are brothers"._ Internationalism was one of the most important features. In 1847 its name was changed to the Communist League and it declared its aim as _"downfall of bourgeoisie, the rule of proletariat, overthrow of old society of middle class based on class distiction and establishment of a new society without classes and without private property"._ Its journals carried the slogan _"Proletariats of all lands, unite!"_

They viewed property in relation to the usefulness to society. They visualised a society free from any exloitation of any kind. The methods advocated by them were impracticable and ineffective and they came to be known as utopian socialists.

  

Marxian Socialism

1. Karl Marx (1818-83) and Fredrick Engels (1820-95) gave a new direction to socialist ideology. Their view of socialism is known as Scientific Socialism.
2. Marx published Communist Manifesto in 1848 whose impact on socialism is unrivaled. It stated that the aim of workers all over the world was the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of socialism. Socialism was not merely desirable but also inevitable. Capitalism does not serve then needs of man and would be replaced by system better suited to human needs.
3. Marx analysed working of capitalism in his famous book Das Kapital and pointed out the characteristics that would lead to its destruction. According to it workers produce more value than they get in return in the form of wages, the difference being appropriated by capitalists in the form of profits. This constitutes the basic conflict in capitalist society. Interests of workers and capitalists are irreconcilable. Economic crisis were inevitable under capitalism. The situation could be resolved only if private ownership is ablished and profit motive is eliminated. Production should be carried on for social good and not for profit. 
4. He envisioned a classless society where there would be no difference between what was good for the individual and for the society as a whole. Emancipation of working class would emancipate the whole human race from all traces of social injustice.

1848 Revolutions

Aimed at overthrow of autocratic governments, establishment of democracy. One of the major forces in these revolutions were the workers who had been inspired by the ideas of socialism. The Communist League participated in these revolutions but all these were suppressed.

  

International Outlook

One of the outstanding feature of socialist movement was its internationalist character.

1. Society of Fraternal Democrats in Britain in 1846. It had close links with other similar organisations in Europe and the Chartists in Britain. They emphasised the idea that cause of working class in all countries was the same.

The First International

1. International Working Men's Association or the First International in 1864.  Marx drafted "An Address to the Working Classes". 
2. The central aim was declared to be the total "abolition of all class rule". The emancipation of the working classes must be won by the working classes themselves.
3. The address ended with the slogan : "_Proletarians of all lands, unite!"_

The govt considered it as a menace and declared it illegal in many countries. During a short period of its existence it exercised tremendous influence on worker's movements in Europe and North America. Bonds of international solidarity got strenghtened.

  

One of the finest example of workers' solidarity was evident during Prussia and France War in 1870. The war was condemned both by the German and French workers as a crime committed. The French and German branches of International sent messages of good wishes and solidarity to each other. German workers protested against the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine from France. All the leaders of German workers were arrested.

  

Paris Commune (1871)

1. After the war in 1871 a new government agreeing to terms and conditions of Bismarck came to power and declared itself republic. It was dominated by propertied class. The workers regarded the surrender to Germany as treacherous and refused to surrender. France took the help of Germany to crush the movement.
2. Workers of Paris elected a council which on 28 March 1871 assumed the title of the Paris Commune. It was elected by Universal Adult Franchise and represented workers and lower middle class. All public offices were elected by universal suffrage with people having the right to recall.
3. The commune was finally exterminated and defenders of commune were slaughtered in thousands. Marx declared that "_Working Men's Paris, will be ever celebrated as the glorious harbinger of a new society"._ 
4. The extermination of the Commune was followed by systematic attempts to destroy the International in almost every country of Europe. It was split in 1872 and finally dissolved in 1876.

The Second International

1. During 1870s and the 1880s almost all the countries in Europe saw the formation of socialist parties. Some of them became quite strong and had an impressive representation in the parliament. Prominent among them were German Socialist Party, Socialist Democratic Federation in Britain, the Socialist League and Fabian Society in France. Socialist movement began to take root in Japan in 1890s.
2. Membership of Trade Unions increased and there were many strikes.
3. Congress was held in Paris on 14 July 1789 the centenary of the FR. It marked a new stage in the history of socialism.
4. 1st May was declared every year as a day of working class solidarity. On 1st May 1890, millions of workers all over Europe and America struck work and held massive demonstrations.
5. Last decade of 19th century saw growing militarism and race for acquiring colonies. This was the main cause of confict. Capitalism was the root cause of the war. Campaign against militarism and war and in asserting the principle of the basic equality of all peoples and their right to freedom and national independence.
6. It was decided that socialist should utilise the "economic and political crisis created by the war, to rouse the masses and thereby hasten the downfall of capitalist rule"
7. International solidarity of workers became fundamental principle. They called for general strike to prevent their countries from waging war. 
8. During 1904 session the Japanese and Russian delegations were made joint president when both these countries were at war with each other. The session was also attended by Dadabhai Naorji who highlighted the plight of India under British rule.

After the Second International the socialist and workers movement had become a major force in almost every country of Europe. Jean Jaures the great leader of French socialists was assassinated on the eve of WWI for campaigning against the war.

  

Weakness

1. It was a loose federation of socialist parties of many countries with diverging interests.
2. Some believed in necessity of a revolution while others favoured gradual reforms. Some even favoured colonialism !
3. Many supported war in the fear that they would be crushed by their govt if they protested. It was on the question of war and the future course of action that Second International suffered a fatal blow. During WWI most of the socialist parties extended their support to their respective governments.
4. After this Second International ceased to function and socialist movement in every country was split.

Achievements

1. It created widespread awareness of the problems created by capitalism and inadequacies of democracy.
2. Powerful political movement started in number of countries such as Russia, China, Cuba. 
3. It had its impact on India as well. It helped Nationalist formulate a strong critique of the economic exploitation by British.
4. It played an increasingly important role in the coming years all over the world making socialism alongwith democracy and nationalism the dominating factor in the history of the world in the 20th century.

  

IMPERIALISM AND COLONIALISM

  

Imperialism means practice of extending the power, control or rule by a country over the political and economic life of areas outside its own borders. Occupation or direct rule is not always the feature. The essential feature is exploitation. Imperialist countries are also called Metropolis (mother country). Imperialism can be achieved through colonialism. It is a story of deception, brutality and armed might. 

Colonialism means practice of acquiring colonies by conquest or other means and making them dependent. Today imperialist control has not come to an end and manifests itself in the form of economic exploitation and domination of independent but economically less developed countries and spheres of influence. This is called 'neo-colonialism'

  

**History**

1st Phase

1. The first phase began in 16th century with the finding of new sea routes and new land. This was the period of slave trade. 5000 slaves were sent to America every month during 17th century. 
2. Africa was used for slaves and Asia mainly for trade.
3. Countries fought war to protect their trading interests. It was a period of naked plunder by European colonial powers. It led to growth of Industrial Revolution and capitalist system

2nd Phase

It started in 1875 and continues in many form today. This period is called New or Neo Imperialism. It was a result of rapid economic progress. The power of Spain and Portugal declined and new powers such as Germany, Japan, USA, Italy, Belgium emerged.

  

**Conditions that helped Imperialism**

Industrial Revolution & Capitalist Philosophy

1. Increased production of goods. Maximum profit was the prime motive. More and more production and minimum wages to workers was the modus operandi. Production was greater then Demand. Low wages led to low purchasing power which led to  less demand. This made necessary the search for new markets.
2. Moreover, one industrialised country could not sell to another as they employed tariff barriers to protect their industry and economic interests. This was known as Protectionist policy.
3. For selling the goods at high price and acquiring raw materials at throw away prices political domination was necessary. It had the benefit of eliminating competition in the colonised country.
4. Industries required raw materials. India and Egypt provided Cotton. Congo and East Indies were used for Rubber. Change of pattern of cultivation took place. Focus was on plantation agriculture and cash crops. Opium cultivated in India was used for smuggling in China which inturn was used for payment for goods bought in China. Peasants were forced to cultivate only one or two crops. 
5. Coal, iron, copper and oil were other major interests.
6. Asian and African colonies were attractive for investors. Rate of return in Europe was barely 3 - 4 % whereas it was 20% in Asia. Export of capital for investment >> Export of goods. Increase in financial might of banks and financial institutions. Control by giving credit and promote industries to serve their need and not to industrialise. 
7. Political domination was needed to make their investment safe as a weak government may not be able to withstand uprising and protect their industries e.g Morocco became French Morocco after heavy investment from France

Transport and Communication

Steamships, construction of railroads and inland waterways by employing cheap labour. Telegraph (Morse), Telephone (Bell). Construction of Suez and Panama canal.

  

Extreme Nationalism

1. It was aided by the unification of Germany and Italy. It was associated with Chauvinism. Myth of superiority over other people. Need for colonies to add to prestige. 
2. Imperialism became fashion of the age. Writers and speakers opened institutions to promote the idea of imperialism and took great pride in calling their territorial empires.
3. Acquiring of colonies for strategic point of view became widespread. England needed Port Said, Aden, Hong Kong, Singapore and Cyprus to set up naval bases.
4. Acquiring a colony led to chain reaction. If a country acquired one then it needed another to protect it and so on.
5. It added to imperialist manpower. People were inducted into army for use in wars and conquest. e.g Indian forces were used in WW. Manpower was also used for admin at lower levels.

Civilising Mission

1. Western countries considered imperialism as a noble purpose. The purpose was to bring civilisation to 'backward' people. 
2. Rudyard Kipling gave the idea of 'the white man's burden'. Jules Ferry said  'Superior races have the duty of civising the inferior race'
3. Role played by Christian missionaries. They went into unknown areas driven by their zeal of spreading Christianity. They were followed by traders and soldiers.
4. Explorers and adventurers also helped in spreading imperialism. They discovered territories and brought back news about natural resources and opportunities for trade and development.

Conditions in Host Countries

1. Economicbackwardness.
2. Governments were weak and fragile.
3. Outdated modes of warfare. Maxim guns was used by Europeans.
4. Lack of education and succumbed to nefarious intentions of colonial powers e.g Granting of diwani rights to EIC by Mughals and considering them as Bees that give Honey by Aliwardi Khan of Bengal.
5. No concept of nation states and people could intrigue against their own kings. e.g Mir Jafar played the role of a traitor in Battle of Plassey.

**Conquest of Asia**

India

Well known. It was known as the '_brightest jewel of the British empire'._

China

  

_Opium Wars_

Before this war only two ports were open for foreign traders. British merchants bought tea, silk but there was no market for British goods. British merchants started smuggling opium into China on a large scale. Illegal trade was highly profitable and did immense physical and moral damage. In 1839 the Chinese government seized an opium cargo and destroyed it. Britain declared war and easily defeated Chinese. 

1. Chinese were forced to pay heavy damages and open 5 port cities to British traders.
2. British subjects were to be tried in English courts rather than Chinese courts. This methodology came to be known as extraterritorial rights. 
3. The Chinese government could not impose tariff on foreign goods.
4. Island of Hong Kong was handed over to Britain.

_French Trouble_

France followed Britain. On the pretext that French missionary had been murdered, England and France fought another war and defeated China. It was forced to grant more privileges.

  

_Japanese Problem_

Japan tried to increase her influence over Korea which was under Chinese lordship. China resented which led to another ill fated  war in which China lost. Korea became independent and China had to cede Formosa and other islands to Japan and pay heavy war damages to Japan

  

_Spheres of Influence_

France, Russia, Britain and Germany gave loans to China to help her meet payment to Japan but at very high cost. They divided China into spheres of influence. Each country had certain regions reserved exclusively for its purpose. They acquired for themselves right to build railways and mining.

1. Germany: Kiaochow Bay, Shantung and Hwang Ho valley
2. Russia: Liaotung Peninsula, railroads in Manchuria
3. France: Kwangchow Bay
4. Britain: Wei-hi-Wei and Yantze Valley

USA which could not withstand being left out suggested an Open Door Policy or Me Too policy. Under this all countries would have equal rights to trade anywhere in China. Britain supported USA in the belief that this would discourage annexation of China by Japan and Russia.

  

_Boxer Rebellion_

This was an uprising against foreign powers. Foreign powers again emerged victorious and levied heavy damages on China as punishment. Imperialism continued with the cooperation of Chinese warlords. 

  

Thus China although not conquered and occupied was reduced to a position of international colony. This is also known as Cutting of Chinese Melon.

  

South and South East Asia

1. Srilanka : Its control passed over from Potuguese to Dutch and finally to England. It was used mainly for Rubber and tea plantations.
2. Malaya and Singapore came under British. Control of all trade that passed through Strait of Malacca.
3. Indonesia and surrounding islands came under Dutch control.
4. Indo China (Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia) came under France.
5. Burmese gave the French the right to construct railway from Tonkin to Mandalay. British govt fearing French expansion started a war. Burmese king was captured and sent to India. Burma was annexed and became part of British empire in 1886.
6. Thailand remained independent but was under the British and French influence.
7. Philippines and Cuba revolted against Spain. US occupied Cuba and Philippines.

Central and Western Asia

1. England and Russia were rivals and were engaged in Great Game. Britain was concerned about defending its territory in India against expansion of Russia. Russia and Britain set up banks in Iran. Southern Iran came under British influence and North under Russian influence. After Russian Revolution the whole of Iran was occupied by British troops. 
2. In a major development Oil was found in Iran. Standard Oil Company of US and Anglo Persian Oil Company of England was set up.
3. Britain and China agreed not to interfere in Tibet through an agreement in 1907. After overthrow of monarchy in 1911, Tibet passed under British influence.
4. Russia agreed to recognize Afghanistan as being outside her influence and Britain agreed not to annex Afghanistan.
5. German increased influence over Turkey and obtained a concession to build a railway from Constantinople to Baghdad and the Persian gulf. After WWI Syria, Palestine, Mesopotamia and Arabia were taken away from Turkey and passed under England and France.
6. Later oil became the focal point of all strategic maneouvres.

**Japan as Imperialist Power**

It started its programme of imperialism in last decade of 19th century. In 1853 American warships under Commodre Perry compelled the Japanese to open their country for American shipping and trade. Similar agreement were made with Britain and France. After Meiji Restoration Japan began to industrialise and within few decades became one of the most advanced countries of the world. Japan had very few natural resources at its disposal and thus looked for greener pastures.

  

Timeline

1. 1894 - War with China.
2. 1902 - Signed treaty with Britain to gain equal standings with European powers and equal rights in China. Southern part of Sakhalin  and Liaotung went to Japan.
3. 1910 - Korea became a colony of Japan

Imperialism was not limited to any one people or region. It was the result of greed for economic and political power regardless of race or cultural claims.

  

**Conquest of Africa**

Till last decade of 19th century European influence extended to only 20% of Africa and that too in coastal areas only. Major interest was only in slave trade.

  

Slave Trade

1. In 1562 Sir John Hawkins brough slaves in a ship called Jesus. Elizabeth received share in profit. The share of King of Spain in slave trade was fixed at 25%.
2. Slave market in Lisbon was set up by Portuguese. Arab also dominated slave trade. African villages were raided, people captured and handed over to Europeans.
3. African chiefs also took part and sold slaves for firearms from Europeans.
4. Slaves were transported as inanimate objects in unhygienic conditions. Lakhs of them died during long journey. Extreme brutalities were inflicted. The person who killed a run-away slave was given a reward by govt.
5. Slave trade ceased to exist by the end of 19th century. 

Berlin Congress

1. Berling Congress (1884) was held to decide how to share out Africa among imperialist countries. 
2. No African state was represented. 
3. Fraudulent and bogus treaties were signed with African countries. As a result almost 30% of African borders are straight lines and drawn arbitrarily.The terms of treaties were misrepresented. Support of European country during war was interpreted as becoming a protectorate.

The partition of Africa was complete by the end of 19th century. But it was just a Paper Partition. The actual control was accomplished through use of military power.

  

West Africa

Primary Interest was Cocoa, Rubber etc.

  

_Belgium_

1. H.M.Stanley with assistance from King Leopold II of Belgium founded International Congo Association. It made 400 treaties with African chiefs. They transferred their lands in exchange for cloth or other articles of no great value. 2.3 m sq km of land came to be known as 'Congo Free State' with Leopold as King.
2. Stanley called occupation of Zaire as 'unique humanitarian and political enterprise'. Rubber and ivory were collected brutally. The treatment was so bad that even other colonial powers were shocked. Hands of defiant villagers were chopped off and brought as souvenirs. In 1908 it became Belgian Congo. Later uranium, timber and copper became more important. 

_USA and Britain_

1. Later USA and Britain also joined. Copper resources of Katanga province was exploited.
2. Britain acquired Nigeria, a land of rich natural resource. Britain also acquired Gambia, Gold Coast and Sierra Leone.

_French_

1. Frenchman de Brazza was active north of Congo river. This area came to be known as French Congo with Brazaville as its capital. 
2. France acquired Senegal, Benin, Ivory Coast and French Guinea. In a period of only 20 years the population of French Congo was reduced to 1/3 rd of its size.

_Deutschland_

1. Came to scene after 1880. Acquired Togoland and Cameroon, South West Africa (Namibia). More than half of the population was exterminated. It also wanted Angola and Mozambique.
2. After WW1 German territories were given to victorious powers.

_Viva La Raza_

It could capture only two colonies i.e Spanish Sahara and Spanish Guinea.

  

With the exception of Liberia whole of West Africa was divided. Liberia was settled by slaves who had been freed in America. It came under the influence of USA

  

South Africa

1. Initially Dutch had established her colony but it was later taken over by the British. The Dutch settlers were known as Boers who went north and had set up Orange Free State and Transvaal.
2. English adventurer Cecil Rhodes made fortunes in mining gave his name to African colony Rhodesia. Northern Rhodesia is known as Zambia and Southern as Zimbabwe. Rhodes became famous for Rhodes Scholarship. According to Rhodes _\- "Pure Philanthropy is very well in its way, but philanthropy plus 5 per cent is a good deal better"_
3. British plotted to overthrow Boer govt of Transvaal which was rich in Gold. This led to Boer War (1899-1902) where Boers were defeated but were allowed to remain there.

East Africa

1. Except Portuguese Mozambique, it had not been occupied before 1884.
2. German adventurer Karl Peters came to the coastal region. He bribed and placed the region under German control. Later through an agreement France got Madagascar and East Africa was divided between Germany and England. Tanganyika came under German influence.
3. Uganda was reserved for England. British East Africa came to be known as Kenya.
4. After WWI Germany lost its territories.
5. Italy occupied Somaliland and Eritrea. Abyssinia (Ethiopia) was an independent state. Italy invaded her but was humiliated as Ethiopia defeated her in 1896 war. Abyssinia received arms from France. This is known as Battle of Adowa.

North Africa

1. France conquererd Algeria in 1830. It was very profitable as it provided huge market for French goods. French acquired Tunisia and Morocco, a strategically placed country. 
2. Britain got Cyprus at Berlin Congress (1878).
3. Germans had been ignored so in order to avoid conflict it was necessary to accomodate her. France agreed to give Germany 250,000 sq km of French Congo.
4. Italy had assured herself of support in her claims over Tripoli and Cyrenica which were possessions of Turkish empire. Italy declared war against Turkey and occupied two provinces which were given the old Roman name of Libya.
5. France got free hand in Western Sudan and the Sahara.
6. Sudan was exploited by Britain and Egypt. A Sudanese leader, Mahdi defeated British and Egypt in 1880s. They later recaptured in 1889.

_Egypt_

1. Egypt was ruled by Pasha. From the time of Napolean French were interested in Egypt. French company got the right to dig Suez canal. The canal was completed in 1869 which aroused British interest. Disraeli the British PM bought large number of shares from Paha to make sure of keeping route to India safe. The canal was described as 'highway to our Indian empire'
2. A joint Anglo French army increased control over Egypt. In 1914, Britain announced that Egypt was not under Turkish control but was a British protectorate. In 1922, Britain was forced to recognise Egypt as independent nation.

**Americas and Pacific**

1. By 1820s almost all countries of the Americas gained indpendence from Spain and Portugal. Cuba and Puerto Rico were still under the control of Spain.
2. US emerged as the biggest power and had immense naval strength. US-Spanish war led to passing of control of Cuba and Philippines in the hands of US. It also gained control of Guam and Puerto Rico.
3. US claimed the right to civilise backward countries and stated that it must not fall out of the line of march.
4. Through Monroe Doctrine (1823) US warned European countries not to extend their influence in the Western Hemisphere. It claimed sovereignty on the continent. 
5. In 1904 Theodre Roosevelt claimed that only US had the right to intervene and resolve dispute involving neighbouring countries. e.g Britain and Germany had imposed a naval blockade of Venezuela over failure to repay loan. US force them to lift the blockade.
6. US gained control over Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Haiti, Hawaii (strategic location, sugar plantation). It also secured exclusive use of Pearl Harbour as a naval station.
7. US intervened in Mexico by deposing Fransisco Madero, a popular leader.
8. US made a major acquisition in the form of Panama Canal. It was of great economic interest. US took control of Panama Canal from France and gained perpetual right to a six mile canal zone. This was resented by Colombia. In 1904 US landed its troops in Panam aand recognised Panama as an independent state. The canal was opened in 1914 and has since been been under US control.
9. The policy of US is known as Big Stick and one of International Policeman. Extension of economic influence is known as Dollar Diplomacy. This was facilitated by absence of strong govt in countries of South America. These countries were ruled by Caudillos or crude and corrupt military leaders with armed gangs. They gave concessions to foreigners to exploit natural resources.

**Effects of Imperialism**

1. By 1914 almost all parts of non industrialized world had come under the direct or indirect control of few industrialised country. All parts were brought under World Economic Order.
2. Countries lost their political freedom and served their interests. Naked plunder of natural resources took place. This resulted into economic backwardness and destruction of local industries.
3. Patterns of agriculture was changed. Cuba was reduced to position of sugar producing country.
4. Even after independence most of these countries found it difficult to modernise themselves.
5. It bred racial arrogance and discrimination. e.g Apartheid in Africa. Intermixing of Blacks and White was made a criminal offence. Denial of rights to black in USA. Japan was given the status of 'honorary whites' by South Africa.