# 20 January

Our last day in Ahmedabad. Our day started with an attachment with Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. We were shown a short video about its working. Ahmedabad is one of the most planned cities in India and follows a unique concept of land pooling where there is no acquisition of land made. The model is currently studied and implemented by other cities as well. It was good to know that there is no political interference in the working of the AMC. Also AMC is a self sustaining corporation and does not suffer from debt problem. Most of the projects are PPP based. AMC sells FSI to earn massive revenues. Also 5% area is earmarked for parks, 5% for roads, 10% for social welfare projects thus ensuring that welfare of the citizen remains the central focal point of the development paradigm.

  

The size of the tea cups served in the office was an occasion for a hearty laugh as it was really small and hardly 20 - 30 ml. 

Then we met the collector of Ahmedabad District Rajkumar Beniwal who is a 2004 batch IAS officer. He gave us practical advise and shared his own experiences at LBSNAA. It was really fun interacting with him. He also told us that good thing about Gujarat cadre is that here officers enjoy stable tenure and there is less political interference and moreover Gujarat is the only state where the DC can request funds for a project outside the routine budgetary allocation.

  

Then we met D. Thara the AMC Commissioner. She is 1995 batch IAS officer. We arrived in the midst of a meeting where the upgradation of BRTS was being considered. I was really impressed to see the minute details which were being addressed by the ma'am. We had also had our first brush with the real sweet Gujarati food where everything had sugar in it. Even the daal was not spared ! Then it was time for words of wisdom from ma'am. She advised us not to pick battle with politicians on every issues as they are the 'real' masters.

  

In the night we left for Kandla. Overall it was a good and positive experience.