# Stories

[https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-of-the-best-short-stories](https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-of-the-best-short-stories)

# **Attitude**

  

> A Man saw a poor young boy looking at his expensive car. He was in a good mood that day and so he offered him a drive. The Boy couldn't believe his luck and joined him.

Boy: Car is marvelous...its so huge. What's the Cost ?  
Man: I don't know exactly. My friend gifted it.  
Boy: So nice of him!   
Man: I know what you are thinking. You also want to have a friend like him right?

Boy: No, I want to be that friend..!!

  

* * *

# **The 8 Monkeys**

  

The 8 Monkeys  
  
(This is reportedly based on an actual experiment conducted in the U.K.)  
  
Put eight monkeys in a room. In the middle of the room is a ladder, leading to a bunch of bananas hanging from a hook on the ceiling.  
  
Each time a monkey tries to climb the ladder, all the monkeys are sprayed with ice water, which makes them miserable. Soon enough, whenever a monkey attempts to climb the ladder, all of the other monkeys, not wanting to be sprayed, set upon him and beat him up. Soon, none of the eight monkeys ever attempts to climb the ladder.  
  
One of the original monkeys is then removed, and a new monkey is put in the room. Seeing the bananas and the ladder, he wonders why none of the other monkeys are doing the obvious. But undaunted, he immediately begins to climb the ladder.  
  
All the other monkeys fall upon him and beat him silly. He has no idea why.  
  
However, he no longer attempts to climb the ladder.  
  
A second original monkey is removed and replaced. The newcomer again attempts to climb the ladder, but all the other monkeys hammer the crap out of him.  
  
This includes the previous new monkey, who, grateful that he's not on the receiving end this time, participates in the beating because all the other monkeys are doing it. However, he has no idea why he's attacking the new monkey.  
  
One by one, all the original monkeys are replaced. Eight new monkeys are now in the room. None of them have ever been sprayed by ice water. None of them attempt to climb the ladder. All of them will enthusiastically beat up any new monkey who tries, without having any idea why.  
  
And that is how  traditions, religions and systems get established and followed.  
  

**Think twice before following a tradition,religion or system blindly .. It would make more sense if you get your own understanding to it.....**

  

* * *

# **Monkey Man**

  

**The monkey man:**  
  
           An unemployed B.E graduate was looking out for a suitable job in his stream. He attended several exams and many personal interviews, only to be rejected. Being fed up after so many months of his job hunt, he decided to get into any job that can satisfy his food and daily needs. He visited a circus group and asked for a job. But the owner said that there wasn't any job for his education level. Also he said that there is a vacancy to act as a monkey and perform funny actions. The unemployed youth accepted the offer since he can at least afford his daily food.  
  

         So he dressed up as a monkey and entertained the audience. One day while he was performing the monkey skills, he accidentally fell into the lion's ring. Everyone was shocked as the monkey fell into lion's ring. No one knew that he was a man dressed up as a monkey. The man himself was dreadful and feared for his life. He felt pity for himself as he was going to be a victim of unemployment. The lion came closer to him but didn't attack. He was surprised. Then the lion spoke, **_" Don't worry B.E., I am a M.E. graduate "._**

  

* * *

# **Smart Wife**

  

## **Smart Wife**

  
A married couple is travelling by car from California to New York.  
  
Being seniors, after almost eleven hours on the road, they were too tired to continue and decided to take a room. But, they only planned to sleep for four hours and then get back on the road.  
  
When they checked out four hours later, the desk clerk handed them a bill for $350.00.  
  
The man explodes and demands to know why the charge is so high. He told the clerk although it’s a nice hotel; the rooms certainly aren’t worth $350.00 for four hours. Then the clerk tells him that $350.00 is the ‘standard rate’. He insisted on speaking to the Manager.  
  
  
The Manager appears, listens to him, and then explains that the hotel has an Olympic-sized pool and a huge conference center that were available for us to use.  
  
“_But we didn’t use them_” the husband said.  
  
“_Well, they are here, and you could have_” explained the Manager.  
  
The Manager went on to explain that the couple could also have taken in one of the shows for which the hotel is famous. “_We have the best entertainers from New York , Hollywood , and Las Vegas perform here,_” the Manager says.  
  
“_But we didn’t go to any of those shows,_” the husband said.  
  
“_Well, we have them, and you could have,_” the Manager replied.  
  
No matter what amenity the Manager mentioned, the husband replied, “_But we didn’t use it!”_  
  
The Manager is unmoved, and eventually the husband gave up and agreed to pay. As he didn’t have the check book, he asked his wife to write the check.  
She did and gave it to the Manager.  
  
The Manager is surprised when he looks at the check. “_But ma’am, this is made out for only $50.00.”_  
  
“_That’s correct. I charged you $300.00 for sleeping with me,”_ she replied.  
  
“_But I didn’t!_” exclaims the Manager.  
  
“_Well, too bad, I was here, and you could have.”_  
  

**Don’t mess with senior citizens… They didn’t get there by being stupid.**

  

* * *

# **Train Window**

  

A 24 year old boy seeing out from the train’s window shouted…  
“Dad, look the trees are going behind!”  
Dad smiled and a young couple sitting nearby, looked at the 24 year old’s childish behavior with pity,  
suddenly he again exclaimed…  
“Dad, look the clouds are running with us!”  
The couple couldn’t resist and said to the old man…  
“Why don’t you take your son to a good doctor?”  
The old man smiled and said…  
“I did and we are just coming from the hospital, my son was blind from birth, he just got his eyes today.  
  

Every single person on the planet has a story. Don’t judge people before you truly know them. The truth might surprise you.

  

* * *

# **Little Bird**

  

A little bird was flying south for the winter. It was so cold the bird froze and fell to the ground into a large field. While he was lying there, a cow came by and dropped some dung on him. As the frozen bird lay there in the pile of cow dung, he began to realize how warm he was. The dung was actually thawing him out! He lay there all warm and happy, and soon began to sing for joy. A passing cat heard the bird singing and came to investigate. Following the sound, the cat discovered the bird under the pile of cow dung, and promptly dug him out and ate him.  

Moral of the story:  
1\. Not everyone who shits on you is your enemy  
2\. Not everyone who gets you out of shit is your friend

3\. And when you’re in deep shit, it’s best to keep your mouth shut!

  

* * *

# **Bullshit**

  

A turkey was chatting with a bull “I would love to be able to get to the top of that tree,” sighed the turkey, but I haven’t got the energy.” “Well, why don’t you nibble on my droppings?” replied the bull. “They’re packed with nutrients.” The turkey pecked at a lump of dung and found that it gave him enough strength to reach the lowest branch of the tree. The next day, after eating some more dung, he reached the second branch. Finally after a fourth night, there he was proudly perched at the top of the tree. Soon he was spotted by a farmer, who shot the turkey out of the tree.  

Moral of the story: Bullshit might get you to the top, but it wont keep you there.