---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Police and Prison Act

Original act of 1861. New Police Act drafted in 2006.

  

**Police Reforms**

National Police Commission (1977-81) proposed a Model Police Act. In 1996 Prakash Singh filed a PIL in SC for taking cognizance of NPC.

Ribeiro Committee set up in 1998.

Committee under K. Padmanabhaiah in 2000.

Soli Sorabjee Comm drafted Police Act in 2006.

  

**Key Points by SC**

- Creation of buffer body between police and govt.
- Enhance accountability of police.
- Not to be transferred frequently.
- Lessen the control of state govt over police.
- State Level Commisssion for policies.
- Police Establishment Board - for selection, promotions etc.

  

**Draft Act**

- Need for Professional Police Service: Efficient, effective, responsive to people and accountable to law.
- Functional autonomy.
- Accountability - performance evaluation. Accountability Comm at district and state level. Forward complaints of serious misconduct, monitor the status of dept enquiries.
- Improved service conditions, regulating working hours.
- Role in internal security, organized crime, insurgency.
- Core vs non core functions.
- Separate system for Metropolitan areas and non metropolitan areas.
- Misconduct by Police: death in custody, rape, arrest or detention without due process of law.
- Separate investigation from normal functioning of police.
- Forensic labs.
- From a Force to Service... Rough to Smart.
- Rights of Complainants:Lodge complaint relating to misconduct. Right to be informed of progress of enquiry, may attend hearing.
- Friendly police stations: Separate women and child desks.
- Emergency Response Team
- Community Liasion Group, Community Participation and Citizen Policing Committee.
- Village Guard

  

  

* * *

**Prison Act** **(1894)**

  

We are seeing a transition: Human Rights, Civil Society, Legal Awareness, Rule of Law.