# Old Age

[http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=99753](http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=99753)

Yudhisthir - Yaksha samvad.

  

Inevitable and unavoidable aspect of our life i.e old age.

  

There are 100 million older persons in India today and by 2050 they would constitute 20% of the population.

  

According to HelpAge India, an NGO, more than 50% elderly population in the country faces abuse of various kinds and 92% of Youths in Delhi don't care about the aged.

  

Better health care facilities has led to increased life expectancy but it has only meant the prolonging of the old age.

  

This is a problem that largely gets swept under the carpet, and is within the four walls of a home. It is grossly underreported and undiscussed as the older themselves do not want to discuss it.

  

Traditionally the Indian value system is not individualistic but a family based society where elder persons are respected. Due to technical advances and migration from rural to urban the roles of elder people have become ill defined and insignificant.

Households are gettting smaller and congested. Marginalization, isolation, insecurity. 

  

Increase in lifespan leads to functional disability creating need for assistance. 

  

Old Age has never been a problem for India where a value based, joint family system is supposed to prevail. Indian culture is automatically respectful and supportive of elders.

  

It's interesting to note that among all the animal species the human baby is the dumbest of all. The pain and agony caused to parents pales in comparison to what our parents cause to us when they become old.

Problems

- Feeling of loneliness and sad. They spent time "talking to walls".
- Victim of violence, neglect, verbal abuse and abandonment.
- Suffer from dementia and alzheimer.
- Economic, emotional, shelter and health care dependence.
- Lack of work, lack of facilities for utilisation of leisure time
- The problem of elderly woman is the worst and the last year we saw the plight of Vrindavan widows and insensitive remarks from policymakers.
- Lack of value system and negative attitude of the younger generation are the most obvious cause. RED FM - ye aaj ka jamane ka channel hai baap ke jamane ka nahin.

My Experience in Shahjahanpur: Old Age Pension Scheme & Amazing talks with them.

  

Solution

- Old age homes. Stigma attached but nonetheless a better solution than daily dose of abuse and violence.
- Recreation homes.
- Self help group.
- Sensitisation of younger persons through creative use of media.
- Counselling of older people to adjust to the needs and changed circumstances of the younger generation.
- Utilisation of productive potential of older persons by involving them in community services.

  

**Dalai Lama - While humankind has reached the moon, it has difficulty in going to the next door and meeting neighbours.**

  

Policies

- The **Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007** was enacted in December 2007 to ensure need based maintenance for parents and senior citizens and their welfare. However, the majority of the elderly don't approach the law to report abuse. This occurs because of the poor awareness and fear that reporting abuse would mean compromising family honour.
- The **National Policy on Older Persons** **(1999)**
- **Integrated Plan for Older Persons since 1992.**

  

There is always hope on the horizon to emerge from the dark but for that we need to change our attitude first for any real and long lasting change.