---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# IPC

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| **17** | **Government** |
| **19** | **Judge** |
| 20  | Court of Justice |
| **21** | **Public Servant** |
| 29  | Document |
| **29A** | **Electronic Document** |
| 31  | Will |
| 34  | Acts done in furtherance of common intention |
| **40** | **Offence** |
| **53** | **Punishment** |
| 54  | Commutation of death sentence |
| 55  | Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life |
| 65  | Limit to imprisonment for non payment of fine. 1/4th of the maximum sentence |
| 73  | Solitary confinement |
| 188 | Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant |
| 191 | Giving false evidence |
| 268 | Public nuisance |
| 272 | Adulteration of food or drink |
| 274 | Adulteration of drugs |
| 279 | Rash driving |
| 292 | Sale of obscene books |

  

**GENERAL EXCEPTIONS**

1. Mistake of fact and not by mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be bound by law to do it (76)
2. Act of judge acting judicially (77)
3. Act done in pursuant to the Judgment or order of court (78)
4. Any person who is justified by law, or who by mistake of fact (79)
5. Accident in doing a lawful act, lawful manner and lawful means (80)
6. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent and prevent other harm (81)
7. Act of child under 7 years of age (82)
8. Act of child above 7 years and under 12 years of immature understanding (83)
9. Act of a person of unsound mind (84)
10. Incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will (85)
11. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or hurt done by consent (87)
12. Not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit (88)
13. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person by consent of guardian (89)
14. Act done in good faith for benefit of person without consent (90)
15. Communication made in good faith (93)
16. Act to which a person is compelled by threat (94)
17. Act causing slight harm (95)
18. Things done in private defence (96)

  

**PRIVATE DEFENCE**

1. Body - own body, body of any other peson against any offence.
2. Property - movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person from theft, robbery, mischief, criminal trespass or an attempt
3. Against the person of unsound mind.
4. No private defence against act which does not reasonable cause apprehension of death, grievous hurt by a public servant acting in good faith, direction by public servant, where there is time to have recourse to the protection of public authorities.
5. Commences as soon as apprehension of danger to body arises and continues as long as the apprehension of danger to the body continues.
6. Extends to causing death in case of Body(100)
1. Assault cause the apprehension that death will be consequence.
2. Grievous hurt will be the consequence
3. Committing rape
4. Gratifying unnatural lust
5. Kidnapping or abducting
6. Wrongfully confining a person where he is under apprehension that he will not have recourse to public authorities.
7. Throwing or administering acid
8. Extends to causing death in case of Property (103)
1. Robbery
2. House breaking by night
3. Mischief by fire
4. Theft, mischief or trespass reasonably causing apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence.
10. Right of private defence against a deadly assault when there is a risk of harm to innocent person (106)