# Singareni LA Issues

### Issue No - 01

  

- Mada Saddaih issue
- Ac 1.20 Gts
- Award based on physical possession

  

- [ ] Award to be passed by RDO as the person was in the possesion of the land. The rest 30-35 members are not in possession of the land because of Kunta Issue.

  

### Issue No - 02

- **Chittari Laxmaiah** & 3 others. The possession is in **Survey No 318/131.** Patta land.
- Ac 1.30 1/2
- Smt **A. Shashirekha** has filed a case in High Court. There is a stay in High Court. WP NO. 1007 of 2023
- Survey No 318/93 - Include the name of the petitioner in the enjoyment column
- Survey was done on **09-12-2022.**
- **Priority - Urgent**
- Not more than **2-3 months** available. The issue needs to be resolved.
- If the issue is not getting resolved at High Court and since the actual possession of Chittari Laxmaiah is not in Sy No 318/93 therefore his possession can be shown in Sy No 318/131 after 2 months in view of urgency and operational safety of Singareni.

- [ ] Whether the survey No 318/93 is being DS or not ?

[WP 1007 - 2023.pdf](../files/a7824e62-cee5-4863-908b-6ca6b387ad2f.pdf)

###   

### **Issue No - 03**

- Marapally Thirupathi Reddy
- OS is pending in District Court.
- Gandra Jyothi vs Marapalli Thirupathi Reddy. Gandhra Jyothi is the pattedar.
- There is no stay from the court. Refer **this case to** **authority** and resolve the issue.

  

### **Issue No - 04**

- Differential amount of Rs. 36 Lakh in case of Eucalyptus Trees.
- 17 members enjoyers.
- **Google Earth Pro** \- check timeline - 2020

  

### Issue No - 05

- Ambula Mahesh & Ambula Ravi.
- Vanga Mahender & Rajanna
- Family dispute.
- **Refer to authority**

### **Issue No - 06**

- Survey No. 318/17 & 18 - Enquiry yet to be done.
- House Sites - 5 Acres land
- Nagrampally Habitation
- The issue needs to be resolved.
- The land has to be resumed in the favour of the Government.

- [ ] Land resume cheyandi.
- [ ] Notice icchi ivvandi
- [ ] Background check regarding their houses

  

### Issue No - 07

- 150 Square Yard to be given to Masjid Issue.
- Singareni has to first surrender the land to the Government and then the Government will take further action.

  

### **Issue No - 08**

- Ramchandra Reddy
- 20 Guntas of land.
- 411 Extent - 318 / 44
- He has put an application to include the structures.
- Fresh requisition has to be filed by Singareni in case of Kondampally.

  

### **Issue No - 08**

- Vemula Mallaiah - He claims 2 Acre land but has no documents.
- Cannot be considered. Case has to be filed against him.

  

### **Issue No - 09**

- Alienation of land proposal
- 19 Acres
- 19.08.2022 - requisition was filed.

  

### **Issue No -**

- 318/111 - 440 Acres
- 8 Acres - High Court Order given
- WP Number: