# Joint Collector Letter - Chief Secretary

### Files

[Joint Collector - Chief Secretary Letter.pdf (55.4 kB)](../files/30fffe41-3f4f-4124-8510-5495fc9d592f.pdf)   

  

Subject: Absence of Smt K. Swarnalatha, IAS, Additional Collector (Revenue), Jayashankar Bhupalpally District from SLMT Training Program to be conducted at MCHRD by Chief Electoral Office, Telangana from 05-06-2023 to 09-06-2023 - Requested to Initiate Action 

  

Reference: 

1. Government Memo No 1812/Elec.A/A1/2023-6, GAD (Elec) dated 02-06-2023
2. This office, Rc No H3/64/Elec/2023 Dated 04-06-2023
3. Instructions of Chief Electoral Officer, Telangana State

  

I invite your kind attention to the references cited above and submit that vide Reference 1st cited above, the Chief Electoral Officer has stated that Election Commission of India, New Delhi has informed that an online training program for State Level Master Trainers (SLMTs) will be conducted from 05-06-2023 to 09-06-2023. It was informed that the training program will be organized at Dr MCRHRDIT, Jubilee Hills, Hyderabad and requested to instruct the SLMTs in the respective districts to attend the aforesaid comprehensive training program as per the schedule.

  

The information regarding the same was communciated to the Joint Collector, Smt K. Swarnalatha, IAS through Whatsapp and also through a memo vide reference 2nd cited above.

  

Smt K. Swarnalatha had applied for Earned Leave from 05-06-2023 to 15-06-2023 on GAD portal and had marked a copy to the undersigned. The undersigned had requested the Member Of Service (MOS) to postpone her leave in view of Telangana Dashabdi Utsavalu, paddy procurement, FLC of EVMs to be scheduled from June 12th and the training of SLMTs. 

  

However, the MOS did not attend the training program scheduled for SLMT on 05-06-2023. Vide reference 3rd cited above the Chief Electoral Officer, Telangana state has instructed to bring this into the notice of the Government. 

  

Therefore, I request the Chief Secretary, Government of Telangana to initiate action against Mrs. K. Swarnalatha for proceeding on leave without approval from the Government.