---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Bihar Land Reforms Act

Bengali year - Baisakh, Fasli or Amli year - Asin

  

Mines Tribunal - 12

Claims officer - 14

Board - 18

Compensating Officer - 19

Bihar Land Commission - 34

  

Intermediary includes - proprietor, tenure holder, under tenure holder and trustee.

  

Agriculture operations by himself, servant or hired labour.

  

Tenure holder a right to hod land for the purpose of collecting rent or bringing it under cultivation by establishing tenants on it 

  

4(h) - annuling a transfer. Revision under 4(h) shall lie to the Commissioner.

  

5 - Homestead of intermediaries to be retained by them as tenants free of rent. The appeal for homestead shall lie within **three months.**

6 - Khas possession of intermediaries to be retained by them on payment of rent as raiyats having occupancy raiyats. Intermediary cannot retain naukarana land or any land recorded as chaukidari chakran or goraiti

  

7 - Buidings used as golas, factories or mills to be retained on payment of rent.

7A - Hat or bazaar not deemed to be settled with intermediary

7B - Right to hold mela to vest in the State.

7D - Industria taking to be settled with the state.

7E - land and building leased will be deemed to be leased.

  

Appeal against collector within **60 days**

**Mines Tribunal**

Chairman - DJ

One member mining expert appointed by the State Government and approved by the Central Government.

  

Secured creditor may file appeal within 6 months. 

  

Claims officer to be Subordinate Judge.

  

Claims Officer -> Board within 60 days.

Board has one member, who shall be Judge of HC (more than Rs. 10 thousand), DJ (less than 10 K)

  

Compensating Officer. Compensation Assessment Roll containing the gross asset and net income of each proprietor and tenure holder. Determine the rate of compensation.

Exceeds more than Rs. 500 then 20 times such net income.

  

Preliminary publication of Compensation Assessment Roll.

  

  

Claims Officer -> Board

Compensation Officer -> Judge of HC

  

Final publication of the CAR. The payment shall be made in cash or bond in 40 equal instalments and shall carry an interest at the rate of 2.5%

  

Bihar Land Commission will consist of Chairman and 11 members. 

Punishment of 2 years and with sanction of the Collector.