# Media and Conflict Reporting

[http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/Readers-Editor/media-matters-in-ways-more-than-one/article8573126.ece](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/Readers-Editor/media-matters-in-ways-more-than-one/article8573126.ece)

Media can help build peace. Conflict prevention, conflict management and post conflict resolution. 

Media can cause escalation of violence and conflict. In the Balkan wars it was "us versus them" (Serbia and Croatia)

Media can give voice to those who are advocating tolerance, peace and negotiation.

Standards, balance and ethics in conflict reporting.

With the rise of new communication technologies are allowing rapid exchange of information. Digitisation of news industry, commercial realties of news gathering. 

Neutrality and objectivity. In a plural society like India where there are multiples fault lines exist within the society.

The best reporting was done by Sanjay to Dhritrashtra.

  

In such situations the ultimate losers are the common people. In the absence of truth, propaganda becomes the "truth". We have to guard ourselves from rhetoric

  

Is media the root cause of conflict itself ?

Freedom of the press an integral part in the whole process. 

  

Lack of training for local journalists who lack the ability to critically analyze and go beyond the event. 

  

Stories of conflict are framed within binary categories of good vs evil, or one communal group against the other. The need of the media to personify a conflict so that an act of an evil or good is attributed to one person. 

Journalists should avoid simplistic representation of issues by probing further and verifying their sources. 

  

In Rwanda, the Radio was used as a medium lay the groundwork for genocide. Similarly in Serbia TV was used to stir ethnic tension. 

  

Point of action for media:

1. It can play a pivotal role in managing conflict. By acting as a watchdog it should blow the whistle on an imminent conflict as an early warning signal.
2. By sounding early alarm it can act as a powerful tool in conflict management and prevention. All conflicts start as misunderstanding or tension between groups.
3. Media should educate the public on the intricacy of a given conflict by highlighting the interest of each of the party to a conflict.
4. Media should desist from scooping stories that make headlines and instead embrace objective and responsible journalism.

  

Challenges

- With the emergence of digital media, there has been a democratisation of news reporting and today everyone with a phone is a virtual reporter.
- Explosion of social media platform like Twitter, YouTube, Facebook and blogs leading to a tendency of hitting the Breaking News platform at the earliest without first verifying the news item.

  

However, as always our media and courageous journalists have stood the test of time and have taken any challenge thrown at them. I hope in future our media and journalism will do our country proud.

  

Information is power. 

  

Conflicts dont occur spontaneously \[1000 and 500 rupee note scrapping\] but tend to have history. Local media has a deeper understanding of existing political structure, the participants of the conflict. Local media is a recognized part of society and with the ability to accelerate or magnify the fears. 

  

Media often plays the role of divisive discourse rather than bridging role. The human element generally gets diluted. There is less coverage of women whether it is about widows, rape survivors, husband missing or orphaned girls. 

  

North East region is considered as a monolith and only myths and stereotypes appear on the region. Media training must incorporate local issues. 

  

Women journalism in regional languages are struggling for rights and recognition basically due to 2 prejudices : Man's job and a woman must return to house before sunset. We need to break this mental image of Male Journalist. I hope when we meet again I see more women journalist amongst you.

  

There is pressure from the State administration, especially the police, on journalists to write what they want or not to publish reports that the administration sees as hostile. There is pressure from Maoists as well on the journalists working in the area. There is a general perception that every single journalist is under the government scanner and all their activities are under surveillance. They hesitate to discuss anything over the phone because, as they say the police listen to every word we speak

  

Government considers them as Maoist sympathiser and maoist as government agent. 

Drumming up jingoistic feelings. News propaganda war. 

  

Media itself is getting converted into a conflict zone. In many states the Orwellian type government is censoring news item and preventing independent investigation. Turning off media lights has only led to conflict spiralling out of control. The media has become a major instrument in gaining legitimacy and exercise power. 

  

Vortex of misinformation.

  

When the news is judged today only by TRP yardstick and the syndrome of Nation Wants to Know. 

  

Rhetoric. 

  

reaffirm that press freedom and the right to information are essential for a free, independent and pluralistic media and crucial to the advancement of human rights and sustainable development

  

These concerns provide the context for the UNESCO’s Finlandia Declaration on May 3, 2016, which asserted that access to information and fundamental freedoms are rights, and that press freedom is an integral component of the right to freedom of expression. The declaration draws from the new United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development that is committed to promote just, peaceful and inclusive societies, which includes points relevant to press freedom, access to information, safety of journalists and the rule of law.

  

I can celebrate a year of no killings, no kidnappings, and no extrajudicial attacks on journalists. Dreams do come true.

  

India is one of the top ten deadliest countries for our journalists. CPJ - Committee to protect journalist.

  

27 Journalist have been murdered in India in 1992 and in the state of Bihar itself we have seen the murders of Mr. Dharmendra Singh (Dainik Bhaskar) and Rajdeo Ranjan (Hindustan)

  

The media recognized as the fourth estate serves as a facilitator, protector and enabler of democratic institutions and processes. It is an important component in the fabric of a functional democracy. As India marches forward into the 21st century, it is extremely important that the free press of India remains strong and vibrant.

  

The first newspaper in India was the ‘Hickey’s Gazette’ or ‘Bengal Gazette’ started on January 29, 1780 by an Irishman, James Augustus Hickey. This weekly political and commercial paper declared itself as ‘‘open to all parties but influenced by none’’ and its content included criticism of the British East India Company. 

  

I recall the thousands of journalists who toil day and night across the country to provide access to latest and accurate information to the people of our country. The media fraternity of India are not only providers of news, but also educators who empower our citizens and strengthen the democratic framework of our country. I thank you for your service to the country and wish you the very best in all your future endeavours.