# Untitled Note

[https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-of-the-best-short-stories](https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-of-the-best-short-stories)

**WIT AND HUMOUR OF DR. EINSTEIN’S DRIVER-TWO GENIUSES**  
  
As a young man with a growing reputation, Einstein received many invitations to go to universities to explain his theories. **On these trips he was always chauffeured by the same person—a man called Hans. Hans often said to him, “It’s a pleasure to drive a genius like you, Dr. Einstein.”**  
   
One evening, on their way to a remote university, Einstein said, “I wish I didn’t have to give my lecture tonight, Hans. I’m so tired. But I can’t let my audience down, can I.”  
   
“You don’t need to,” said Hans.**“We’ll change places, and I’ll give the lecture for you. I’ve listened to it a dozen times.** I don’t understand it, but I know it by heart. And no one knows you at the university, do they? No one will find out.”  
   
Einstein eventually agreed with Hans, but said to him, “Don’t try to answer any questions, whatever you do.”  
   
They changed places, and at the university, Hans was greeted and led to the platform in a great hall crowded with professors and students. Einstein joined the audience and listened to Hans give his lecture perfectly, and joined in the applause at the end.  
   
However, before Hans could get off the platform, a professor shouted from the audience, “I’d like to ask you a question. It’s very difficult but please answer it.” He then asked the question so difficult that Hans had no idea what he was talking about.  
   
Einstein thought, “Oh Dear, now we’re in trouble.” **But Hans just laughed and said, “That’s not a difficult question, sir. In fact, it’s so easy even my driver knows how to answer it. Hans, stand up and…….**.”  
   
**Einstein stood up and answered the question perfectly.**  
 

**They left the university, with Einstein driving. A little later, Hans offered to take over from him. “No my friend,” laughed Einstein, “it’s a pleasure to drive a genius like you.**