---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# BTC

**Bill**

Bill is a statement of claims against the Government containing the nature and amount of the claim either in gross or by items and includes such a statement presented in the form of a simple receipt or advance stamped receipt.

  

**Voucher**

Means a bill or cheque when it is duly receipted and stamped "paid".

  

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| 27  | Systematic inspection by Collector |
| 28  | Inspection by AG |
| 69  | Emergency Provision of Rs. 1 crore |
|     |     |
|     |     |

  

  

**Role of Collector**

- The treasury shall be under the overall charge of the collector. Executive control to TO and administrative control with him (6)
- Shall bring to the notice of AG, Finance Department any loss of stamps or other valuables. Detailed report after personal investigation. If brought to notice by AG then submit report to Government
- Periodical examination once a year for stamps, securities and cheques under joint lock and key and correspond to book balance (9). Once every quarter for deposit registers are kept according to prescribed rules (9)
- When assuming charge of the district see that the stock of stamps, valuables is thoroughly verified and certificate of taking of charge is dispatched to CS, AG, GAD, Finance and Registration Department (Form 1)
- Monthly account to be jointly signed (11)
- Bank to be kept open (7) if required by the collector.
- Systematic inspection once a year (27)
- Emergency provision of Rs. 1 crore (69)
- Pension amount of Rs. 50K - 500K is payable by orders of Collector (239)
- Collector to have PD Account (340)

  

**TO**

- Departmental exam.
- IAS, BAS, BFS, Bihar Acc Service
- TO responsible to the collector.