# Costing

[http://www.dummies.com/how-to/content/cost-accounting-the-economic-order-quantity-formul.html](http://www.dummies.com/how-to/content/cost-accounting-the-economic-order-quantity-formul.html)

Job order costing is used by companies manufacturing different products e.g clothing factories, food companies.

  

Per unit cost = Total cost applicable to job / Number of units in the job.

  

Process Costing: Where a single homogenous product or service is produced. 

  

Margin of Safety = Actual sales - Break even sales.

  

**Reorder point:** The _reorder point_ is the time when the next order should be placed. EOQ assumes that you order the same quantity at each reorder point.

  

Economic Order Quantity is designed to minimize ordering and carrying costs.

  

**Purchase order lead time:** The lead time is the time period from placing the order to order delivery. EOQ assumes that the lead time is known.

  

Two most important categories of inventory costs are ordering costs and carrying costs. Ordering costs are costs that are incurred on obtaining additional inventories. They include costs incurred on communicating the order, transportation cost, etc. Carrying costs represent the costs incurred on holding inventory in hand. They include the opportunity cost of money held up in inventories, storage costs, spoilage costs, etc.

  

Ordering costs and carrying costs are quite opposite to each other. If we need to minimize carrying costs we have to place small order which increases the ordering costs. If we want minimize our ordering costs we have to place few orders in a year and this requires placing large orders which in turn increases the total carrying costs for the period.

  

EOQ = SQRT(2 × Quantity × Cost Per Order / Carrying Cost Per Order)