# Untitled Note

Dear Ila

I have a hard time in deciding which expression of yours I like the most. Here is a brief description of few of them.

  

The first is the expression when you are doing something in full concentration. At that moment your cheeks inflate and you look absolutely adorable and cute.

  

Next comes the squeezy nose gesture. Some times those are genuine and sometimes you make it to tease me. I love when you do that. It adds zing to the life.

  

The best part about you is your beautiful and gorgeous big eyes. They are mesmerizing and a very glance at them makes me fall in love with you. I like when your eyes sparkle when you are happy. I want to keep looking at them forever.

  

I have a habit of walking a tad faster than you and sometimes inadvertently I leave you behind. Next comes your reaction of stopping and giving me a hard look. It's very cute indeed. I love to hold your hands and play with your fingers and walk together after that.

  

Although I don't want to see you sad or irritated but there are times when you look cute in those times as well. For instance when you are struggle to unlock your phone or when the weather is hot and humid, the expression of 'Naaaa aaaa aaa ... ' makes my day.

  

Your expressions showing surprise (Gosh ...) and refusal (Nooo ... Bhavesh No...) are too good to resist and sometimes I do something deliberately to evoke these responses.

  

I like the fact that you are keen on learning new things. And you have two expressions for them: accha! ..... and hmm... mmm. It's always good to share new facts, trivia and hear these words.

  

Since I am exceeding the word limit therefore I will wrap up my answer with the best expression of yours. You look so cute and lovely when you are genuinely happy. Your eyes lit up, face brightens, lips turns luscious and cheeks become more round. The expression is followed by words like: awesome! and my faborite 'aa aaaa aa, aaa aa'. I think you should patent this sound of yours.

  

#MyIla