---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Citizen Centric Governance

**Quotes**

1. Man's capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man's inclination to injustice makes democracy necessary - Thomas Jefferson
2. Democracy is the worst form of governance except all those forms that have been tried from time to time - Sir Winston Churchill
3. A customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not dependent on us. We are dependent on him. He is not an interruption in our work. He is the purpose of it. He is not an outsider in our business. He is part of it - Mahatma Gandhi

**What role does the Government play?**

  

Regulatory Function

Thomas Jefferson said government is created to secure the inalienable rights of all citizens - i.e., the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. If everyone were to be allowed to pursue complete freedom for doing whatever he wants to do and to pursue his happiness, then it could lead to a situation where rights and freedom of other persons may be aff ected. This necessitates the regulatory role of government.

  

Restrictions are imposed for larger good of the society. 

  

There are large number of cases where public interest is sacrificed due to both over regulation and under regulation (weak buildings) 

  

Following principles should be kept in mind:

1. Regulation only when necessary - India is an over regulated country. There are sheer number of laws. Outdated laws.
2. Effective - Large number of regulations leads to their slack implementation. Social legislations are classic example.
3. Self Regulation is the best form of regulation - Income Tax, VAT, Property Tax. 
4. Regulations should be simple, transparent and citizen friendly. 
5. Involving citizen groups, professional organisations in regulation activities.

Service Providing Functions

1. Involving NGO, corporate, local bodies.
2. Initiate a voluntary service initiative in our social sector.
3. Monitor performance in service delivery. Third party audit. Citizen Report Card. Performance based incentives.
4. Linking permanence in service to performance.
5. Database to monitor performance of various schemes.
6. Ensure competition, efficiency and accountability
7. Single Window System. Germany has adopted Single Window Multi Channel Government (SWMCG). There are Citizen Service Centres that provide facilities for registration, licenses. A single CSC caters to 1,00,000 population.
8. [www.direct.gov.uk](http://www.direct.gov.uk/) provides single web based access to information and public services delivered by UK government.

  

Development Function

1. For socio economic development of its citizens.
2. Mandatory social audit.

**Problems and Solutions**

  

Current Problems

1. Routine and repetitive procedures
2. Paper work and delays
3. Rigidity of the system
4. Centralisation of powers
5. Highly hierarchical and top down approach
6. A large number of intermediary level delays finalisation of decision
7. Divorce of authority from accountability
8. Tendency towards micromanagement
9. Form becomes important than substance and procedures are valued over end results and outcomes
10. Abuse of authority
11. Lack of responsiveness
12. Hardly any effective redressal system
13. Wooden
14. Red tapism
15. Rules and procedures are viewed as an end in themselves. We can't continue to remain prisoners of archaic procedures and processes.
16. Inspector Raj.
17. Employees adopt an apathetic or lackadaisical attitude towards citizens and their grievances.
18. Disciplinary proceedings are seldom taken and imposition of penalties is even more rare.
19. Inflexible
20. Self perpetuation
21. Inward looking.
22. Safeguards provided to civil servants which were well intentioned have been misused.
23. Mismatch between what is required and what is provided. Policies and actions are far removed from the needs of the citizens.
24. Article 311 of the constitution. 
25. Refuge behind the wall of collective decision making in committees which can not be brought to book.

What Should be Done?

1. Sound legal framework
2. Proper implementation of laws and their effective monitoring
3. Decentralisation, delegation and accountability
4. Transparency
5. Citizen feedback mechanism
6. Suo moto disclosures
7. Rule of law - Zero tolerance
8. Independent valuation of the quality of Governance
9. Re engineering government process to make it citizen centric
10. Grievance redressal mechanism
11. Active citizen participation
12. Minimising complexity
13. Streamlining and linearising the process
14. Responsive
15. Proactive
16. Adopt the Idea of subsidiarity
17. Process simplification
18. Flexibility in implementation and customized to local needs.
19. Empowering citizens
20. Information facilitation and solution centres.
21. Feedback mechanism
22. Consensus Oriented
23. Decentralisation and delegation
24. Focus on outcomes
25. Maintain harmony between their thoughts, words and deeds.
26. We can learn from the British experiment of having Public Service Agreement (PSA) with local government under which objective and measurable targets for various services are fixed together with an evaluative mechanism. The funds are allocated on the basis of their achievement on PSA.
27. Mexico has a competition for the most useless bureaucratic procedures.

  

Administration exists for the welfare of the people. It is not meant to exist in some kind of ivory tower following rigid rules and procedures. The real test of administration is human beings and their welfare.

  

Ethos of serving the citizens should permeate all government organisations. Primary function of the state is to promote the welfare of the citizen. Evaluation of the functioning of the government has to be based on the satisfaction they provide to common man.

  

Prominence should be given to the voice of the citizen.

  

CVC was set up in 1964 following the recommendations of the Santhanam committee. First ARC had recommended the setting up of Lok Pal.

  

**Citizen Charter**

  

Citizen Charter is based on the promise that Citizen is "King" and government organisations exist not to rule but to serve the citizens. It is an instrument which seeks to make an organisation transparent, accountable and citizen friendly. Broadly it states Vision and Mission statement of an organisation. This gives the set of outcomes desired and strategy to achieve these goals and outcomes.

  

Seven Step Model by ARC

1. Define all services and identify clients.
2. Set standards and norms for each service.
3. Developing capability to meet standards.
4. Perform to achieve standards.
5. Monitor performance against the set standards.
6. Evaluate impact through independent mechanism.
7. Continuous improvement based on monitoring.

How should it be framed

1. KISS (Keep it Simple Silly)
2. It must only be framed by senior experts but should involve field level staff
3. Merely announcing charter will not change the way we function. 
4. Statement of services offered should be accompanied by remedies if these services are not met.
5. A structure for obtaining feedback from citizen must be in place.
6. Awareness campaign both within the organisation and among public.
7. Adopt best practices. Trains in Europe provide compensation for late running.
8. One size doesn't fit all approach.
9. Holding officers accountable for results.

Problems in Citizen Charter

1. Not formed through consultative process. End users and NGO are not consulted.
2. Service providers were themselves not familiar with goals of the organisations and principles contained in Charter.
3. Adequate publicity has not been given. No funds earmarked for awareness generation.
4. Poor design and content. Most of them are verbose. 
5. Charters are not updated. It has become a one time exercise frozen in time.
6. The needs of senior citizens and disabled are not considered.
7. Resistance to change.
8. Lack of interest shown in their implementation.
9. No time frame or user charges mentioned. Standards of delivery are seldom defined. It becomes difficult to assess the whether the desired level of service has been achieved or not.
10. There is no mechanism to compensate the citizen for lack of delivery of services.
11. Overlooks local issues. The charter of Parent Organisation is copied in all offices.

  

**Sevottam model**

  

It is a Service Delivery Excellence Model. It was felt that Citizen Charter would not alone lead to desired results. It works as an evaluation mechanism to assess the quality of service delivery.

  

It involves

1. Citizen Charter
2. Public Grievance Redressal

**Citizen Participation**

Paradigm shift from "top down" to "bottom up". Increasing decentralisation. Transforming representative democracy to participatory one. Citizens are no longer considered passive beneficiary but they are seen as equal stakeholder in the development process. It is a democratic right.

  

Citizens Involvement

1. Seeking information : RTI
2. Giving suggestions : Listening to the voice of citizens not only during elections but making it a continous process. Citizens are in the best position to indicate their priorities and possible solutions. 
3. Demanding better services -  Simple Suggestion Box
4. Holding service providers accountable -  Citizen Report Card (Bengaluru)
5. Making citizen part of policy formulation and decision making - Communitisation of services in Nagaland. It is a partnership between the government and the community for sharing responsibility in management of public institutions and services. Social Audit. Bhagidari - Citizen Partnership in Delhi.
6. Enabling Women Participation and Disabled.

  

Benefits

1. Ensures accountability and makes governance efficient and responsive.
2. Makes government services more effective and sustainable.
3. It enables poor and marginalised to influence public policy.
4. It helps promote healthy grassroot democracy.

  

**Decentralisation and Delegation**

Principle of Subsidiarity

The central authority should perform only those functions which cannot be performed at intermediary or local level. The government should "_steer rather than row"_ and perform role of facilitation rather than itself undertaking. The activities so delegated can be carried out by private sector or citizens group.

  

Benefits of Delegation

1. It saves time and leads to quicker decision making.
2. Develops and grooms people for leadership role.
3. Provides more time for deliberations and constructive review.
4. Increases productivity and saves cost.
5. More level of satisfaction.

Barriers to delegation

1. Reluctance by superior to delegate - Lack of trust, will not get credit, difficult to monitor.
2. Reluctance by subordinate to accept - Easier to ask than to take initiative, fear of making mistakes, avoid criticism.

How should it be promoted?

1. Culture of transparency where subordinates have required information.
2. Capacity building.
3. Better communication channels and feedback mechanism
4. Subordinates should be made to feel important.
5. Rewarding good performance.
6. A culture of trust and risk taking.
7. Standards to measure and evaluate performance.
8. Avoiding "upward delgation"
9. Building motivation and commitment.
10. Avoiding micromanagement of routine work.

  

**Grievance Redressal**

  

Effective and timely redressal of public grievances is a hallmark of responsive and responsible governance. The society is today is impatient with old system of governance which is not performing up to its expectations. 

  

Institutions

1. Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances.
2. Centralised Public Greivance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRMS).
3. Initiatives like Lokvani in UP.
4. Central Vigilance Commission
5. State Lokayuktas.
6. NHRC, SHRC etc.

Why do we have grievances?

1. Abuse of office or due to corruption.
2. Systemic deficiencies within an organisation.
3. Non fulfillment of needs.

  

**Process Simplification**

The working of most government organisation is based on Weberian principle of decision making governed by rules and regulations.  Outdated rules and regulations. Clear assessment of citizens needs, weeding out unnecessary rules and documentation, redesigning of process. Bring about changes in forms, process, structure and statutes. Ensuring rationality and simplicity should be the objective. Use of ICT. 

1. Single Window Approach. Reducing hierarchy.
2. Stipulating time limits for disposal of cases.
3. Phrases like 'left to discretion of', 'as far as possible' should be left out from manuals.
4. System of rewards and incentives for simplification and streamlining of procedures may be introduced in each department.
5. Principle of 'positive silence'
6. Doing a pilot study and getting it evaluated.
7. Re-engineering of whole process.

Jankari - RTI facilitation on phone.

  

The extent to which citizens are satisfied are seldom captured by organisation. 

  

**e-Governance**

Steps Taken in Past

1. Department of electronics was established in 1970
2. NIC in 1977
3. National e-Governance Programme in 2006

Mahatma Gandhi had given the concept of Su-Raj

  

All this leads to erosion of trust in governance.

The system cries out for change.

  

**Role of Citizen**

  

A vigilant citzenry, fully aware of its rights as well as duties, is perhaps the best way to ensure that officials as well as other citizens, discharge their duties effectively and honestly.

  

Low levels of compliance of Rules by the citizens is also an impediment to good governance.

  

Awareness of rights and duties are two sides of the same coins. 

  

**International Ranking**

1. Global Competitiveness Index
2. Corruption Perception Index

Information asymmetry.

  

The traditional role of civil service which was of administrator, service provider and controller of development activities has to make way for the new roles of facilitator and regulator so as to create best environment and conditions in the country for building a nation of excellence.

  

**YOJANA GOOD GOVERNANCE**

1. Define Good Governance. What are its characterisitics.
2. Governance is not only the concern of the governed. Comment
3. Governance is more than merely economic governance. Justify
4. Minimal Government vs Paternalistic Welfare State. Which is more suitable in India?
5. Changing role of government in current context. Can market and civil society substitute Government.
6. What are the major concerns in governance today?
7. 'Judicial Creativity' should not stifle 'Executive Creativity'. Substantiate it with examples.
8. What is Rule of Law. What's its importance ?
9. Role of Self Help Group and Microfinance.
10. What are the causes for regional disparity in India. What are its consequences and how to tackle it?
11. Discuss the importance of Capacity Building in furthering the cause of Good Governance.
12. Discuss the need for innovation in Government.
13. Criminalisation of politics is a threat to Good Governance. 
14. Government, Market and Civil Society are three principal actors in governance. Elaborate
15. Religion and Democracy.
16. Contrary to belief there is resurgence of State in many areas of governance. Substantiate.

**Good Governance**

There are varying definitions of Governance but it can be broadly defined as: The exercise of political, economic and administrative authority to manage a country's affairs at all levels. It comprises mechanisms, processes, and institutions through which citizens and groups articulate their interests, exercise their legal rights, meet their obligations, and mediate their differencesa - UNDP

  

Good governance is, among other things, participatory, transparent and accountable. It is also effective and equitable. And it promotes the rule of law. Good governance ensures that political, social and economic priorities are based on broad consensus in society and that the voices of the poorest and the most vulnerable are heard in decision-making over the allocation of development resources.

  

Good governance provides an environment in which all citizens develop to their full potential. It aims at providing public services effectively, efficiently and equitably to the citizens. Concept of welfare state is enshrined in the Constitution. Citizens are at core of good governance.

  

Average citizen is less concerned about various structures and processes of governance than with obtaining rapid equitable access to services. Our priority must be to place the citizen at the centre of a modern public administration. This is the idea of inclusive government

  

Mechanisms for assuring good governance have three key elements: 

1. Internal rules and restraints (for example, internal accounting and auditing systems, independence of the judiciary and the central bank, civil service and budgeting rules)
2. “Voice” and partnership (for example, public-private deliberation councils, and service delivery surveys to solicit client feedback)
3. Competition (for example, competitive social service delivery, private participation in infrastructure, alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, and outright privatization of certain market-driven activities)

8 Attributes of Good Governance

1. Accountable
2. Responsive
3. Equitable and Inclusive
4. Transparent
5. Consensus Oriented.
6. Participatory
7. Follows the Rule of Law.
8. Efficient and Effective

Pre Conditions Required for Good Governance

1. Strong Civil Society
2. Free Press
3. Independent Judiciary
4. Civil service embued with professional ethos
5. Enlightened policy making
6. Free participation of citizens in electoral process.

4 Pillars of Good Governance

1. Ethos of service to citizen
2. Ethics (honesty, integrity and transparency)
3. Equity (treating all sections alike with sympathy for weaker sections)
4. Efficiency (speedy and effective delivery without harassment)

Observation

Rwanda has made clear progress in terms of economic growth, public sector management and regulatory reform since the genocide in 1994. As many other observers note, its record with respect to democracy and respect for civil and political rights has been extremely problematic. Should Rwanda be considered well governed because of its economic progress, or poorly governed because of its democratic deficits.

  

**Market, Civil Society and Government**

  

Today the primary responsibility of the state is to facilitate, enable and coordinate the efforts of civil society and market forces. Market and civil society can't become substitute for the government.

The government has to become an agent of change and guarantor of social justice.

  

Problematic Areas in Governance

1. Chain of accountability from civil service to legislature and to political authority is weak.
2. Limited oversight by parliamentary committees.
3. Criminalisation of politics and increasing role of the caste in regional politics.

Rule of Law and its importance

1. The concept of good governance is undoubtedly linked with the citizens’ right of life, liberty and pursuit of happiness. This could be  secured in a democracy only through the rule of law
2. The rule of law is expressed through the axiom that no one is above the law. One has to clearly understand that the rule ‘of’ law is different from the rule ‘by’ law. 
3. Under the rule ‘by’ law, law is an instrument of the government and the government is above the law while under the rule ‘of’ law no one is above the law not even the government. 
4. It is under this framework that rule of law not only guarantees the liberty of the citizens but it also limits the arbitrariness of the government and thereby it makes government more articulate in decision-making. 
5. The rule of law as Dicey postulated is equality before law. This is secured through formal and procedural justice which makes independent judiciary a very vital instrument of governance. 
6. In our constitutional system, every person is entitled to equality before law and equal protection under the law. No person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty  except according to the procedure established by law.

Effective Delivery of Services

Demands have to flow from bottom up and not from top down. 

Judiciary, media and civil society play important role in ensuring delivery of services. 

Capacity Building

  

Decentralisation of power is necessary to empower people. It fosters confidence and reduces dependency on higher authority for meeting basic needs.

The most crucial element is building up of leadership qualities. 

Access to information, innovation and accountability are needed to build an environment for capacity building.

  

Religion and Democracy

  

Democracy doesn't belong to any faith. Equally, no faith is synonymous with democracy. We have given primacy to values of pluralism. The constitution guarantees, judiciary upholds and leaders believe in this value system.

  

Bottlenecks in implementation of policies

1. Multiplicity of laws governing same or similar set of issues.
2. Requirement of large number of approvals.
3. Separate clearances from different authorities for same issue.
4. Too many point of contacts.
5. Lack of transparency in administration of clearance.
6. Little communication or information sharing among different departments.

  

**ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS - YOJANA**  

**Quote**

1. Nations have succeeded in casting away the yoke of foreign rule only to discover that they have to fight a new against their own system which remained infected with the ethos of the repressive and exploitative regime. 
2. Every revolution dissipates and leaves behind only the slime of a new bureaucracy. 
3. There is no doubt that we have had our success in bringing a some smile on the face of our people. 
4. Has the vision of democracy as envisioned in the Stroke of Midnight Hour has faltered ?
5. Problems can't be solved by same level of thinking that created them.
6. If you want to build an efficient all India service, I advise you to allow the service to open their mouth freely - Vallabhbhai Patel

**Why Reform Administration**

1. Administration from a patwari in the village to cabinet secretary at the centre is the face of the government for the people. Reform in the administration is a sine qua non if we wish to see a fundamental transformation of our country.
2. The transformation of society depends critically upon the transformation of administrative apparatus from being Sahibs to Sewaks. 
3. The steel frame needs to flow with the spirit of service without which it will become a cage resisting change. 
4. The civil services, the administrative apparatus of the state and the architecture of government provide the instrument to turn vision into reality. Administration provides social legitimacy to the system.
5. Quality of governance is the primary reason behind success stories of advanced countries of West. India's dismal record can be traced to its poor public service.
6. Today the aspirations and expectations of citizens from the government system are of highest order of excellence. There can be no comprise with the quality (Akash Tablet and Tata Nano example). 

What we want?

1. People oriented
2. Efficient
3. Responsive
4. Transparent
5. Effective
6. Flexible and adaptable

What we get?

1. Rigidities
2. Weberian model of bureaucracy which we inherited from British based on hierarchy and strict adherence to rules.
3. Needless complexities.
4. Overcentralisation
5. Abuse of authority.
6. Unresponsive to people's needs.
7. Red tapism
8. Status quo
9. Poor work culture
10. Lack of professionalism
11. Politicization of services.

What compels change?

1. Furious pace of tech change
2. Rapid globalisation
3. Growing specialisation in fields of administration

How it can be done

1. Devolution of authority
2. Performance contracting
3. Customer focus.

**The Way Out ?**

1. Linking promotion with actual performance on the job - Avoid excessive reliance on Annual Confidential Report (ACR). Existing system of performance appraisal is unsatisfactory. It should be 360 degree mechanism. Independent third party should be associated with the assessment. First review after 14 years and another on completion of 20 years. Dead wood should be weeded out.
2. Bringing competition in civil services - Lateral entry, specialising the generalists. Need for specialization (First ARC had recommended it in 1969). Getting the best men for each job.
3. Enforcing strict disciplinary regime - "Public employees are like headless tail, you can get them in, but can't get them out". This results in poor work culture. The constitutional safeguards have shielded the guilty against swift punishment. It has created a climate of excessive security without fear of punishment for incompetency.
4. The multi hierarchical structure should be reduced. Need to create a lean, thin and efficient government machinery.
5. Streamlining rules and procedure.
6. Adapt to local conditions. 
7. Multi year budgeting cycle. UK has 3 year budgeting. It avoids rush at the end of the fiscal year.
8. The whole system is based on mistrust. Government must repose trust on its civil servants.
9. Increasing use of competition in the delivery of public services, including competition between public and private sector providers has improved cost effectiveness and service quality.
10. Create a Performance Based Organisation.
11. There is a need for political and bureaucratic will at the highest level to bring about meaningful change.
12. The relationship between Civil Servant and ministers should be of trust and non partisan functioning. Good governance is a casualty when political executive and the civil service cosy up to each other forgetting the norms for good administration.
13. Business as usual cannot deliver results. The reforms will bring success in long run but will be painful in short run. Closeness to political masters may bring short term advantages.

Advise for Civil Servants

1. Maintain high personal integrity. Strength of service is people's faith in absolute incorruptibility and honesty. They should be absolutely beyond reproach. Even in corrupt regimes such officers are respected.
2. Fair in administering laws, policies and administrative decisions. 
3. Develop an analytical ability to fully assess and understand issues. Decisions arrived at after full understanding are likely to be implementable and deliver expected results.
4. "Out of the box thinking". Don't hesitate to take the right actions.
5. Good governance is the fundamental right of the citizens. Identify gaps in public service. Be open minded and mentally receptive.
6. Don't hesitate to take decisions. Acts of omission often may go unnoticed or not punished. These are, however, extremely harmful for good governance.
7. Learn to take full responsibility. Delegation must be accompanied by effective leadership. This will require not blaming subordinates for shortcomings.
8. Sensitive to the needs of marginalised groups.
9. Analyse all reasonable policy options which can be considered on the issue. Putting forth views clearly and logically. State what you consider the most appropriate course of action and not what minister thinks best.
10. Don't criticise Government policies in public discussions. As a civil servant the responsibility is to provide support to the government. By criticising you are undermining government, as well as yourself.
11. Develop inter personal skills.
12. Adapting to IT simplifying administrative procedures.
13. Feedback mechanism.
14. Form a consensus viewpoint. Not be shy of taking tough decisions in the interest of effective policy implementation.
15. Work diligently with all stakeholders as a team.
16. Stand by your principles and convictions.
17. Identify people's felt needs and enmesh them in your programmes.
18. Exercise of power has to be done by an independent application of mind.
19. One cannot keep opposing a decision taken by the government unless there are serious intellectual differences.
20. Orders which are illegal or against any statutes have to be ignored. 
21. Success has price. It cannot be based on falsehoods, inequity and illegality.

**RTI**

1. A major success has been in exposing the major Adarsh Society scam in Mumbai, mismanagement of Commonwealth Games, 2G Spectrum.
2. The success of the legislation is attributed to people power only as they have relentlessly pursued to compel authorities to be more accountable.
3. There are more than 4 million RTI queries every year.
4. The act of seeking information is easy and simple. The information seeker just needs to have high willpower and right intent. 
5. NCPRI - National Campaign for People's Right to Information
6. Public authorities are reluctant to share information and Information Commissioners are overburdened with RTI applications with inadequate staff.
7. CIC can have maximum 11 commissioners but presently it only has 5.
8. There have been violent attacks on RTI activist. Sehla Masood, Amit Jethava, Satyendra Dubey.
9. Foot soldiers. 

You must be the change you wish to see in the world.

“As human beings, our greatness lies not so much in being able to remake the world - that is the myth of the  
atomic age - as in being able to remake ourselves”

  

Mahatma vision of strong and prosperous India can't become a reality unless we weed out corruption from our politics, economy and society. Purna Swaraj 

  

Governance is the weak link in our quest for prosperity and equity.

  

Elimination of corruption not only has moral imperative but also economic one.

  

Improved governance in the form of

1. Non expropriation
2. Contract enforcement.
3. Decrease in bureaucratic delays

It also boost India's image on international stage. As a favourable ranking in Transparency International Report or improvement in ranking in the Ease of Doing Business is likely to see greater foreign investment and collaboration with Indian government. For example, Scandinavian countries with low levels of corruption finds it extremely hard to do business in corruption ridden environment.

  

6 Governance quality measures:

1. Voice and accountability.
2. Absence of political instability and violence.
3. Government effectiveness.
4. Reasonableness of regulatory burden.
5. Rule of law.
6. Absence of graft.

What is Rule of Law?

Constitutional safeguard has shielded the corrupt from abusing the public office. This has led to erosion of accountability. It has created a heap of roadblock in reducing corruption. While the honest have to be protected the dishonest seem to have cornered most of the benefit available under Section 311. Such provision not available in UK. 

One of the indicators is delay in the sanctioning prosecution of a delinquent by the competent authority. 

Departmental enquiries are soft-pedalled either out of patronage or misplaced compassion.

  

Public office is a office of trust. There are 2 facets to corruption

- The institution which is highly corrupt
- The individuals which are corrupt.

Transparency, openness, boldness, fairness and justice.

  

Absence of rules is clearly not a problem. The rule of law cannot defeat the perversity of the heart. The line between good and evil passes straight through the middle of every human heart. He who administers government by means of virtues is like a pole star which keeps its place and all the other star turn towards it. When the ruler himself is right, the people naturally follow him in his right course. If the governance is by men who are derelict the governed will suffer. 

  

@Plato injunctions:

  

_"The punishment suffered by the wise who refuse to take part in the government is to suffer under the government of bad men"_

  

@Confucius described righteousness as the foundation of good governance and peace. Man should first become righteous then only there shall be righteousness in the world. 

  

Good governance must be founded on moral virtues.

The act of good governance simply lies in making things right and putting them in right place. People do not adhere to principles and act in their own self interests.

  

Ethics is a set of standard that helps guide conduct. The problem is that present codes of ethics are not direct and to the point. 

They are like vague sermons. For formulating a code of ethics the we should keep in mind Napolean's advise:

"_Law should be so succinct that it can be carried in the pocket of the coat and it should be so simple that it could be understood by a peasant"_

The standard of probity. The question of propriety (correct behaviour) in governance. 

  

Jawaharlal Nehru in the Mudgal Case and Lal Bahadur Shastri in the railway accident. They set high standards of conduct in parliamentary life.

  

The concept of quid pro quo.

  

"_The standard should be one of not only the conduct of Caesar's wife but of Caesar himself"_

Merely shrinking the role of government by resorting to deregulation, liberalisation and privatisation is not necessarily the solution to the problem. e.g. 2G spectrum case and coal block allocation, Aircel Maxis Deal, Saradha Scam case.

  

Minimise discretionary decisions. 

  

#Social Audit.

  

The move by the government to weed out antiquated laws is a welcome step.

  

Public example would have to be made out of people convicted on corruption charges.

  

Social monitoring and RTI

  

@Gladstone: "_The purpose of the government is to make it easy for people to do good and difficult to do evil"_

We resort to blame game. Legislature blame judiciary, executives blame legislature, bureucrats blame politicians and if nothing left everyone blames democracy itself.

  

One has to discharge its sphere of responsibility.

  

Accountability and responsiveness are the real solutions to the conflicting situations. 

  

Ministers in Tony Blair’s government have had to resign on such minor improprieties as a telephone call to the concerned person to fast track the issue of a visa for the ‘nanny’ of the Minister’s child.

  

High standard of conduct in parliamentary life: Mudgal case, JLN

  

Public example has to be made out of people convicted on corruption charges.

  

Growing permissiveness in society to corruption.

  

Social audit and social monitoring. Right to information has to be the starting point.

  

Alibi for our lapses.

  

Culture of integrity needed.

  

Ethics is a set of standards that society places on itself and which helps guide behaviour, choices and actions. Standards do not, by themselves, ensure ethical behaviour; that requires a robust culture of integrity. The crux does not lie in bold words but in putting in place competent disciplinary bodies and promoting a culture of integrity.

  

The word ‘ethics’ is from the original Greek term ethikos,meaning ‘arising from habit’.

  

Corruption is so deeply entrenched in the system that most people regard corruption as inevitable and any effort to fight it as futile. This cynicism is spreading so fast that it bodes ill for our democratic system itself.

  

If good behaviour is consistently rewarded and bad behaviour consistently punished, the bulk of the people follow the straight and narrow path. 

  

Both values and institutions matter. Values are needed to serve as guiding stars, and they exist in abundance in our society. A sense of right and wrong is intrinsic to our culture and civilization. But values need to be sustained by institutions to be durable and to serve as an example to others. Values without institutional support will soon be weakened and dissipated. Institutions provide the container, which gives shape and content to values.

  

e.g Delhi Metro Train or Temple example. 

  

3 factors further compound the problem:

1\. Colonial legacy - exercise of power arbitrarily. Society which worships power.

2\. Enormous asymmetry of power. 90 % in unorganized sector. Nearly 70% of organised are under state jobs.

3\. Citizen at the mercy of the state. Over regulation, severe restriction on economic activity.

  

Monopoly and discretion increase the propensity to corruption while competition and transparency reduce corruption.

  

Coming of competition and expansion of choice has greatly reduced corruption in many spheres of governance. Similar role has been played by technology and transparency. 

  

For a large democracy India still has the smallest number of decision makers. Local government is not allowed to take root and power has been centralised both horizontally and vertically. The net result is weakened citizenry and mounting corruption.

  

Empowering citizen

- RTI
- Citizen Charter
- Citizen Report Cards
- Public Consultation

The quality of politics. If politics attracts and rewards men and women of integrity, competence and passion for public good, then the society is safe and integrity is maintained. Honesty is incompatible with survival in politics.

  

Culture for zero tolerance of corruption. Citizen a victim of extortion. They end up losing more by resisting corruption.

  

Kamal Hasan in movie India.

  

Collusive corruption. As the economy is freed from state control the extortionary corruption declines and collusive corruption increases which is undermining the foundations of our democracy and endangering society.

  

several cases of collusion between the bribe giver and corrupt public servant

  

Even if corruption declines in certain areas it shifts towards others. 

  

State enjoying a monopoly.

  

The United Nations Convention against Corruption was adopted by the UN General Assembly in October 2003, providing an international instrument against corruption. The ADBOECD Anti-Corruption Action Plan, which has been signed by the Government of India, is a broad understanding to further the cause of inter-regional cooperation in the matter of prevention of corruption. The World Bank has also declared war against corruption by refusing to fund projects whose implementation is tainted by corrupt practices. At the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group in Singapore in 2006, a joint statement was issued with major multilateral financial institutions agreeing on a framework for preventing and combating fraud and corruption in the activities and operations of their institutions.   

  

Right to Information in India. SC ruling to disclose assets. Paid news.

  

  

#Whistleblower Legislation

We need to award exemplary punishment to the corrupt thereby raising the risk associated with corrupt behaviour.

  

Corporate ethics and business ethics. We need to have ethics in every profession. 

  

Corruption today has just become a way of life.

  

#Ethics in citizen behaviour because such behaviour impinges directly on ethics in government and administration. 

  

**Arthashastra**

Kautilya in Arthshastra gave alteast 40 ways of embezzlement. 

  

Just as straight trees are chopped down first, honest people are taken advantage of first.

  

Corruption is motivated by private gain over public expense. It destroys the moral fabric of the society and erodes the faith of the common man in the legitimacy of the politico administrative set up.

  

Kautilya considered embezzlers to fish moving under water where it is impossible to detect when fish is drinking water !

While it is possible to ascertain the movements of birds in the sky it is difficult to gauge the corrupt activities of government officials.

  

Such an effort to establish team spirit creates a sense of belonging among members of the department who start identifying and synchronising their goals with the larger goals of the organisation, thereby contributing to the eventual success of the state.

  

Birds don’t build nests on a tree that doesn’t bear fruits and citizens never support a weak administration.

  

Kautilya also dealt with the concept of whistleblowers. Any informant (suchaka) who provided details about financial wrongdoing was entitled an award of one-sixth of the amount in question. If the informant happened to be a government servant (bhritaka), he was to be given only one twelfth of the total amount.

  

Humans are fickle minded ?

  

The ancient Chinese ruler provided extra allowances called yang-lien to keep their officers clean. 

  

Even Rig Veda there is a sloka that appeals to the God to exterminate the degenerate, criminal and the corrupt.

  

Just  as  it  is  not  possible,  not  to  taste honey or poison put on the surface of the tongue, so it is not possible for the Government  servants  dealing  with money not to taste it in however small a quantity

  

  
  

#Connivance

  

Indians have always valued a world beyond the material and embraced spiritualism as a way of life. Instances abound in our epic of triumph of good over evil.

  

The vigilance of our enlightened people.

  

Transparency International Index.

  

Public servants should not work with a private agenda but for the welfare of the public. It will lead to greater empowerment of the people - the core need of the democracy.

  

**Social Infrastructure**  
Educate citizens about the evils of corruption, raise awareness level and give them a voice.  
  
This introduces a new dimension of accountability to the people rather than just legislative and legal accountability.  
  
The Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) of Hong Kong has produced exemplary results over the last 30 years by strengthening the ability of civil society to question corruption. It also produces a television drama series called the ICAC investigators. It spreads anti-corruption message. Corruption is portrayed as something which is harmful to families, to the society and to the economy. Bringing about change in public attitude to corruption.  
  
Indian Perspective  

1. Public Interest Litigation
2. Jan Sunwai by Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan, Rajasthan. It brought out corruption in local public works.
3. NCPRI Delhi: It used RTI law to expose corruption in PDS.
4. Campaign for Citizen Charters by PRAJA of Mumbai.
5. Satyameva Jayate programme.

Civil society organisations are path breaking initiatives. The successful initiatives of civil society underscore the criticaliy of educating people and raising their awareness.  
  
Involving the masses  

1. Inviting civil societies to oversee government programmes.
2. Disseminate service standards.
3. Establish complaint mechanism
4. Access to information
5. Public hearings to audit government activities.
6. Awareness campaign through radio, newspapers and the television.
7. Assess public service delivery periodically
8. Incorporating corruption as a subject in the education curriculum
9. Setting website on corruption
10. Feedback form from citizens.
11. Associating former public servants in lobbying against corruption.
12. Enforcement of Citizen Charter. MP Act for Right to Service Delivery Act, 2010
13. Policy of incentivising citizens should be actively pursued. Enacting a False Claims Law is one way. 
14. A reward system for reporting cases of corruption will also help. FCA (False Claims Act) in US makes it possible for interested citizens to approach any court in any judicial district for recovery of proceeds of corruption. Here the plaintiff is rewarded with a 15-35% of money. It is based on the premise that government alone can't win the war against fraud and it is necessary to involve citizens in the entire process. A significant feature is the protection offered to whistle blower.    

Problems with Citizen Charters  

1. Fallen into disuse
2. Promises have become pious declarations
3. No mechanism to enforce them
4. It would be better to have few promises which can be kept rather than a long list of lofty declarations which are impractical.

**Role of Media**

1. Crucial role in prevention, monitoring and control of corruption.
2. Inform and educate. Expose corruption. Investigating reporting and sting operation.
3. Due to cut throat competition and race for TRP media does not verify the allegations before putting them in public domain.
4. PCI has prescribed a Code of Conduct for print media. However, no such code exists for the electronic media.

  
Ethics is an art of self government.  
  
United Nation Convention against corruption adopted in 2003 . It has been signed by India but yet to be ratified.  
  
UN Office of Drugs and Crimes (UNODC) has been coordinating efforts to trace and identify illegally transferred funds.  
  
  
ADB OECD Anti Corruption Action Plan for Asia Pacific has been signed by GoI is broad understanding to further the cause of inter regional cooperation in the matters of prevention of corruption  
  
  
The need of the hour is to have zero tolerance towards corruption  
  
**Social Audit**  
  
Who does?  
Client, beneficiary, or civil society  
  
Benefits  

1. Prevention of wrong doing in procurement of products and services and in distribution of welfare payments.
2. Checking of attendance of teachers and students in schools and hostels.
3. Check host of other citizen service oriented activities of government.
4. Operating guidelines of all schemes and programmes should provide for a social audit mechanism

  
**Societal Consensus**  
Fight against corruption necessarily requires broad consensus on the importance of making society corruption free.  
  
  
**Systemic Reforms**  
  
Monopoly + Discretion - Accoutability = Corruption  
  
Holistic approach for combating corruption would require optimum mix of punitive and preventive measures. Punitive measures act as deterrent whereas preventive measures reduce opportunities for corruption by making system transparent, increase accountability.  
  

1. e-Governance : E-Seva (Andhra Pradesh), FRIENDS (Fast, Reliable, Instant, Effective Network for Distribution of Service)
2. Rural Kiosks, in Andhra

The lack of transparency is fertile ground for corruption. Bureaucratic complexity and procedures make it difficult for ordinary citizen to navigate the system  
  
Monopolistic setting promote corruption. Taking advantage of departmental hegemony.  

1. De monopolisation of telecom sector. It is one of the most successful examples of curbing corruption through introduction of competition.
2. Growing role of private players in providing direct marketing services to farmers outside the government controlled mandis  in MP.

Simplifying Transaction  

1. Malady of admin is the multiplicity of layers in every decision making.
2. Single Window Clearance. In Canada the single window gives all approvals in just 2 days.
3. Concept of Positive Silence
4. Using IT - Gyandoot project in MP. It seeks to provide information about prevailing agricultural produce prices at auction centres and easier processes for obtaining copies of land records.
5. Bhommi Project (KN) where 20 million records of land ownership wre computerised.
6. Before any introduction of IT is attempted, it is necessary that the existing procedures are properly re engineered and made computer adaptable. Greates challenge have been in their replicablity and up scaling. Bottlenecks abound. NIC should take concrete steps to build up skills and domain expertise among its personnel.

Transparency  

1. An organisation is transparent when its decision making and manner of working is open to public and media scrutiny and public discussion.
2. Example of improved transparency is the system for transferring teachers in Karnataka. While the earlier system was ad hoc, the current is a computerized system processing transfers centrally.

Integrity Pacts  
It can create confidence in public contracting. It is an agreement between the public agency involved in procuring goods and services and the bidder for a public contract to the effect that the bidders have not paid and shall not pay any illegal gratification to secure the contract in question.  
  
Discretion  
Opportunities for corruption are greater in a system with excessive discretion in the hands of official machinery.  
  
Supervision  
As governments and agencies have hierarchical structure the need for effective supervision becomes paramount. There have to effective checks and balances. Supervision provides such mechanism. The very fact that not many cases are initiated against corrupt officials by the department itself is an indicator that the supervision function is not being given the attention it deserves.  
  
With the constitution of independent agencies to combat corruption, departmental officers feel that it's not their responsibility to curb corruption and turn a Nelson's eye to the problem  
  
External machinery can in no way be substitute for anti corruption measures taken by officers in leadership positions.  

1. Random inspections
2. Surprise visits
3. Confidential feedback from citizens
4. Use of decoy clients

There should be a column in the self assessment portion of ACR wherein each officer should indicate the measures taken by her to check corruption in office and what were the outcomes of such measures.  
  
Reporting officers tend to play 'safe' by not commenting objectively on the integrity of a public servant even when the certain unethical practices have been noticed.  
  
Colourless entries such as 'nothing adverse has come to notice' are quite common.  
  
Accessibility and Responsiveness  
Facilities, concessions and rights which are available to them in each department should be made public and procedure for getting their grievance redressal.  
  
Appeal procedure and timely disposal of application.  
  
Rustomjee Committee on Administrative Reforms had identified 187 services required by the citizens in different departments and had fixed time limits for their disposal.  

1. Help desk
2. Prominent display board.
3. Automatic call centres
4. Simplified computerised systems of service delivery

Concentration of corruption prone tasks in few hands should be avoided. The task as far as possible should be broken up into activities which are handled by different people.  
  
Business Process Re-engineering in official functioning required. Back office functions are segregated and take place in a time bound manner based on the principle of 'first in first out' with the minimum scope for discretion while the front office should be a  
'single window' for provision of services to citizens in full public view.  
  
Monitoring Complaints  
Most public offices do have a complaint monitoring centre but more often than not the system does not work as the complaints ends with the official against whom the charges are alleged. It usually takes several months to get a response.  
  
In contrast the ICAC in Hong Kong responds to complaint within 48 hours. In Singapore, a complainant to the office of the Commission is attended within 5 minutes, the complaint is looked within 24 hours and an enquiry or investigation is completed within 2 months.  
  
Unless public bodies respond promptly, all efforts to give a voice to the citizen would be futile.  
  
Reforming Civil Services  
  

The system should be transformed so that at every level of the civil service there is a clear assignment of duties and responsibilities with structured and interlocking accountability in which the government servant can be held accountable for the manner in which he/she performs his/her duty. Such assignment should be specific and categorical and include in concrete tems the supervisory and oversight responsibilities of the controlling officers.  
  
At present, there is no incentive to work diligently and efficiently and no adverse consequences of shirking work, indulging in corruption or failing to achieve an acceptable level of efficiency.  
  
There is no performance audit.  
  
Risk Management  
The risk of corruption depends on the nature of the office and its activity and the character of the person holding the office. An office having more discretion and more public interface is more vulnerable to corruption than an office in which there are no discretionary powers.  
The posts can be qualified as : High Risk of Corruption, Medium Risk of Corruption, Low Risk of Corruption  
  
A risk management system should be in place that should ensure that 'low risk personnel' should hold 'high risk jobs' and vice versa.  
  
Risk profiling poses a challenge in the sense that the present system of performance evaluatoin discourages a reporting officer from giving anything 'adverse'. Therefore it would be more suitable if risk profiling is done by a committee of eminent persons after the officer has completed ten years of service and then once in every 5 years.  
  
One method is integrity test. These tests are used in some developed countries.  
  
Since 1994, NYPD has conducted a very intensive programme of integrity testing. It creates a fictitious scenario base upon known acts of police corruption such as theft of drugs to test the integrity. All officers are aware that such programme exists and their own conduct may be subjected to such tests. However, the frequency of such tests is not known creating an impression that the tests are far frequent than they actually are.  
  
Audit  
The information becomes available to the anti-corruption bodies only when the audit report of the CAG is laid before the Parliament. By the time a serious irregularity comes to knowledge a lot of time is lost. Such delays alert the culprits and allow them to destroy evidence and material making it extremely difficult to complete investigation.  
  
Anti corruption bodies should be equipped to undertake forensic audit of government departments where major irregularities come to their notice.  
  
There should be a public shaming of known corrupt officers.  
  
Vigilance Network  
Create a database of corruption cases and update regularly. Incorporate all related information involving conflict of interest, officers of doubtful integrity, contractors, suppliers etc. Part of this information should be accessible to the general public, part to all departments and entire information to ACB. The CVC may take the lead in establishing such a networked database.  
  
Protecting Honest Civil Servants  
The raisen d'etre of vigilance activity is to enhance the level of efficiency and effectiveness in the organisation.

  

Risk taking should form part of government functioning. Every loss caused need to necessarily become the subject matter of a vigilance enquiry. There could be bona fide mistakes. This view was expressed by former PM Manmohan Singh as well as the current PM Narendra Modi where he has called for civil servants to innovate.

  

Managerial decision making offers considerable scope for genuine mistakes being committed which could possibly raise questions.    

  

There is a general perception among officer that anti corruption agencies do not fully appreciate administrative and business risks and that they tend to misinterpret the motives where the decision has gone awry.

  

Allegations can be made by dishonest subordinates against whom the officer has initiated disciplinary proceedings or he may have stood in the way of dishonest intentions of the corrupt subordinate. More sinister could be the role of "aggrieved" outsiders who failed to have their wrongful way.

  

It is generally assumed that:  

1. A decision should be wrong for there to be corruption
2. It is easier to involve everyone in the chain of decision making and allege 'conspiracy' than to take pains to find out the individuals who are actually involved.
3. This approach has led to conviction rates being dismally low, honest functionaries demoralized and dishonest ones often going scot free.

  
The crucial question is one of ensuring a balance between equality before law and protection of an honest civil servants who has her reputation to safeguard, unlike a corrupt one.

  

CBI powers to initiating investigating against officers of JS and above has been declared unconstitutional by SC. This is known as 'Single Point Directive'  
  
SC in Jain Hawala Case had annulled the then executive direction of the Government. To nullify this the Govt brought in a statutory requirement in the DSPA to safeguard honest civil servants.  
  
**Relation between Political Executive and Permanent Civil Service**  
  
The relationship between the Minister and Civil Servant is organic. The minister has the mandate of the people to govern, but the civil servant has an equivalent constitutional mandate to advise the minister. Once his advice has been suitable considered, unless the Minister passes an illegal order, the civil servant is bound to implement it.  
  
A civil servant is required to implement the orders of govt without bias, with honesty and without fear or favour.  
  
There is no system of specifying of accountability thus making relationship only issue sensitive. The civil servants should be held accountable for the delivery of key results. The political executive is judged on the basis of whether it has chosen the right outputs to achieve social goals. If this is done, the relationship between the political executive and permanent civil service would have been objectively defined.  
  
Arbitrary transfer and posting of civil servants at the behest of the ministers. The process of transfer of civil servants is perceived so lucrative that it is popularly known as the transfer industry. The officers are shifted in utter disregard of tenure policies or any concern about the disruption of public services and the adverse effect on the implementation of development programmes.  
  
Instrument of transfer is widely misused. It is also used used as an instrument of punishment.  
  
Any premature transfer should be based on sound administrative grounds. The civil servants should be given the right to appeal against such an order if he feels aggrieved. The transfers are effected at the whims and fancies of the decision making authority.  
  
Another likely area of conflict between the Minister and the officers is the influence exercised by the Minister in the day to day functioning of subordinate officers. It has often been observed that Ministers issue instructions formal or informal to influence the decisions of the subordinate bureaucracy.  
  
Several states have created an institution of 'District Incharge Minister' to review the development activities in the district. There have been instances where District Ministers have exceeded their brief and issued instructions which come totally within the officer's domain.

  

We must end on a note of optimism. We have always valued a world beyond the material and have embraced spiritualism as a way of life. Instances abound in our epics of good behaviour, of the triumph of good over evil. There is no reason why that cannot be attempted again.

  

Corruption free government will lead to greater empowerment of the people - the core need of a vibrant democracy.

  

**Punchlines**

1. Moral failure of something.
2. Ethical violations / Ethical lapses.
3. Represent tip of the iceberg.
4. The whole is greater than the parts.
5. _Res Publica -_ the public or common good
6. Public morality should be of higher value than private morality because public servant carry out public trust. Public employees take an oath of office to discharge faithfully discharge their responsibilities.
7. Ethics should be an integral part of the school curriculum.
8. People can interpret same issue differently.
9. Self serving administration
10. If everybody is doing it, that does not necessarily mean that it is a done thing.
11. Hippocratic oath - _primum non nocere_ (above all, not knowingly to do harm)
12. Principle of natural law.
13. It is sometimes immoral to be legal. Pro life movement.
14. Alexis De Toqueville
15. Legality and morality should overlap but in many cases they do not.
16. A straight stick appears bent when placed in a glass of water. This leads to errors in observation.
17. Religion and ethics.
18. In the course of human development, many ordinary beliefs and convictions had to be discarded. For thousands of years people believed that the earth was stationary at the center of universe. The belief was erroneous.
19. Ethics relies on human reason alone to develop principles applicable to all people.
20. In a pluralist society, people's religion, morals and values differ. Therefore it is difficult to teach ethics without also teaching a particular viewpoint or offending those whose views differ.
21. World that exists is a product of human consciousness.
22. These are not final pronouncement but these do serve as a good starting point.
23. Human reason is far from perfect. Different schools of philosophical thoughts have emerged because of these limitations of human intellect.
24. Diametrically opposite views.
25. Both the approaches (Teleological and Deontological) combined together will not solve all the problems of ethics.
26. Wonder is the beginning of the philosophy
27. People have senses and intellect. Intellect gives the capacity to form ideas.
28. Acquisition of knowledge
29. Our senses provide us only data, while our knowledge comes from judgements. 
30. Descartes claimed that the only way to find objective truth is by attempting to doubt absolutely every judgement.
31. I think. Therefore, I exist.

Earlier there was not keen interest in the ethics of administration. Gradually due to demographic changes, increase in literacy level, growth of technology people started demanding more of government in areas such as education, health, transportation etc. 

  

Deontological == Absolute standard for assessing morality. 

  

Devil's advocate

  

Trustworthiness of senses. 

  

If human beings do not have free will, they are not responsible for their actions. There is no question of discussing ethics when human actions are determined by another source. 

  

Train of thoughts.

  

The common thread.

  

Deontological perspective teaches that we ought to do perform good actions, and provides rules for doing so but doesn't tell us how to do good. 

  

Difference between situation and circumstance?

  

The major focus of ethics is on human actions. Ethics focuses only on people's deliberate human actions, and not on undeliberate actions or actions done because of ignorance. If someone places a gun in my hand and pulls the trigger it is obvious that my will does not control or cause that action.

  

     1. Knowledge

     2. Voluntariness

     3. Freely done

  

Ignorance of law - it does diminsh the humanness of the action. Ignorance of fact.

  

Passion influence human action. Passions include anger, grief, love, hatred or greed. We must avoid extreme passion as it leads to irrational behaviour.

  

Fear

It destroys a person's freedom of choice and destroys the voluntariness of that action. The action is not human action. 

  

Habits

Habits influence the nature of human action. It is a quality acquired through frequent repetition that enables the subject to act easily and promptly. It is an inclination that is also difficult to remove. Good habits are virtues and bad habits are vices.

  

Temperament

It is the sume of person's natural propensities as opposed to character, which is a collection of a person's acquired propensities, such as habits.

  

Drugs and alcohol can impair human reasoning and knowledge. If the action is not human it cannot be analysed from a moral perspective.

  

Morality involves examination of human action to decide whether it is good or bad, right or wrong.

  

**What is the purpose of human actions?**

1. Epicureans defined that ultimate purpose of human action is pleasure. This is "eat, drink and be merry" code of ethics. 
2. Stoics claimed that the ultimate aim of human action is to cultivate the human mind or acquire knowledge.
3. Materialsim maintains that peoples' happiness consists in acquiring material goods. 
4. Humanism holds that the ultimate end of human action is in achieving prospertiy and progress for the human race. 

**How to differentiate between Right and Wrong?**

Are all human actions right or wrong because of some extrinsic circumstances, such as rules of law or are atleast some human actions intrinsically evil? 

1. Divine positivists claim that actions are good or evil because God has freely commanded them to be so. 
2. Human positivists, hold the difference between right and wrong arose from custom or because of education or social influences. Rousseau held that actions are good when the state commands them and evil when the state forbids them. e.g Polygamy was once lawful but today is immoral.
3. Utilitarianism : Test of goodness or badness is the usefulness of the action. Greatest good for the greatest number. John Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham. It promotes selfishness, it destroys the dignity of the individual and makes people cogs in the wheels of human progress. There may be conflicts between what is good for the individual and for the community. 
4. Education and cultural development help clarify our perception of what is right and wrong. But education alone cannot explain the universal agreement that certain actions, such as murder, are morally evil.
5. Some human actions are intrinscially evil and some actions are intrinsically good. Some actions are wrong by their very nature. 
6. Intuition : Human beings have a special sense faculty that enables them to perceive directly what is right and what is wrong. e.g Sense of taste. Ultimate criteria is common sense. There are principles that people but cannot explain.
7. Rationalism : For the sake of duty. Acts are good if they can be universalized that we should act in the way everybody else in the same circumstnaces would act. The essential element is human reason. This is called Categorical Imperative. It would not explain the morality of actions when no law exists to command such actions.

**Parts of human actions?**

  

Object

Every action has an object. It distinguishes the act from every other act. 

1. Telling the truth when the silence will suffice. It can destroy another person's good name or character.
2. Walking may be an indifferent act but walking into store to steal becomes a morally wrong action.

Circumstances

1. To strike in self defense vs without any provocation
2. Stealing from a corrupt billionaire may not be as bad as stealing from a homeless person though both are evil act.
3. It increases or decreases the intensity of the action.
4. However, it makes morality subjective and relative. There is nothing to prevent two persons in same circumstances from giving two diametrically opposite meanings to the same action. 

End Purpose

It is the purpose the person had in mind while doing the act. It is the intention. 

1. Running for good health vs running for stealing something.
2. Donation to a homeless to lure her into doing something evil is immoral.
3. Telling a lie to defame another person is more wrong.

A good end doesn't justify a bad means.

  

**Act of Double Effect?**

Some actions have 2 effects - good and bad. How to decide the morality of such actions?

1. The action must be either good or indifferent and intrinsically wrong
2. The good effect must not be obtained through evil effect.
3. The intention should be good
4. There must be good reason or cause for performing the action in the first place.

Clinical trials and Abortion serve as good examples.

  

The actor doesn't intend the evil effect. The good purpose - saving the pregnant woman's life - is the primary effect. 

The surgical procedure is not the evil effect, it is an indifferent act, neither good nor bad in itself. But it causes two effects, one that physician intends and other he or she does not intend.

  

**Laws and Conscience**

  

There are two additional guidance. One is outside the actor - law and second is within the actor - conscience.

Law must conform to the human nature. It must be physically and morally possible to obey laws. Laws must also be just, distributing goods and burdens equally. The law should be for common and not private good.

Citizens must be aware of the existing laws. 

  

Laws also have territorial limits:

1. Natural law - bases on human nature, developed with time, human reason can discover it. Natural law is written in the hearts of men.
2. Divine laws. 

Universal beliefs irrespective of time, place and civilisation. These are embedded in human nature.

It has two qualities - universality and immutability. It extends to all human beings.

  

While natural law is universal, all human beings may not subscribe to its general principles in the same way. It does not necessarily result in the same actions.

  

Natural law does not change because human nature does not change. 

  

What is the punishment for violating natural law?

  

If civil laws are based on natural laws there is a moral obligation to follow them. 

     • Lawful government with proper authority

     • Not contrary to natural law

     • For the common good and not for private

     • Authority has sufficiently promulgated it.

Absence of any of the above leads to civil disobedience. It subscribes to a higher law than a civil law. The person acts morally but illegally. Legality and morality should be identical.

  

Natural law holds that murder is wrong. Pro life people consider abortion as wrong as it amounds to taking of an innocent life.

  

Civil laws cease to exist because of some privilege and in special circumstances.

  

There are so many laws, rules and regulations that govern human behaviour that it is virtually impossible for any human being to know all of them. We do not need strict standards to govern human behaviour, the human intellect is capable of knowing and judging what is right and what is wrong. Information, reflection, judgment, decision and action are the criteria for determining morality. 

  

Conscience

Laws states a general rule concerning actions, conscience lays down a practical rule for specific action. It is wider than law. Conscience is to law as a brush is to paint. 

  

A doubtful law is never binding. 

  

Getting things right vs doing the right things.

  

Educating and updating the conscience. 

  

All public administrators have to make discretionary administrative decisions.

  

  

Inalienable rights. Right to life. 

  

Quality of rights is limitations. All human rights are limited because they come from natural law which does not confer abolute rights on anybody. Exercise of one right is curtailed by exercise of another right. 

"Your right to wing your arm stops at my nose"

  

Duty also limits the exercise of rights. I may have a right to drive a car but I have a corresponding duty not to kill others while driving. 

  

Human beings are not only rational but also social. They have the duty to themselves and other human beings. 

You should be first your own best friend. How can you think well of or treat other people fairly and decently if you hate yourself or have a poor self image.

  

Taking the will in decision making so that our decisions are morally good. 

  

We belong to the society, the family and the state. We owe these institutinos something for the benefits they have conferred on us. With suicide we deprive society of its claims on us. We fail to fulfill our duty to soeicy.

  

"Just Cause" for something

  

Family planning. 

  

Good effect should take precedence as long as it is the primary intended effect.

  

Ethics does not present pre packaged, agreed on principles or solutions to the morality of human actions. People have a conscience and in the last resort that conscience must decide what is right or moral for them in a particular case.

  

Thorny problems.

  

Medical ethics.

  

Self defense.

     • The danger can be avoided only by self defence. If the victim can depart the scene the other actions of self defence are unnecessary and should not be taken.

     • The attack must be actual and proximate

     • The attack must cause or be about to cause real danger, such as loss of life, limb or property

     • The intention of the victim must be self defense and not revenge

  

Truth

It is conformity of speech and thought. It is conformity of what we think and what we communicate. If a person is unaware of the contradiction then it is only a simple error. A formal lie is a conscious and deliberate statement contrarty to what is in the communicator's mind.

  

Essence of lies

     • Statement contradicting thought

     • There is an act of the will to state or communicate something contrary to the thought.

     • There is an intention to deceive

  

Types of lie

     • Untruth told to harm another person

     • Untruths told to harm another person

     • Told in jest or fun

  

A lie occurs only when a person tells an untruth to another person who has a right to know the truth. 

The natural purpose of speech is to convey one's thoughts or judgments to others. A lie distorts this process and therefore contrary to natural law.

Circumstances make the action of lying only less bad, never good. The end doesn’t justify the means.

  

Sometimes researchers make the bad results look good, either by skewing data or misinterpreting the findings. Using deceptive tactics to protect oneself is not professional behaviour.

  

Confidentiality vs Right to Know.

  

Revelation of the secret for the common good vs the individual good.

  

Euthanasia

Whether the person is still a person. Does death mean cessation of the heart? Cessation of the brain? Or both?

Science has been unable to resolve this issue. 

  

Abortion

When does life begin?

Pro life argue that human life begins at the moment of conception.

  

Consider the circumstances, reflect on the options, weigh them carefully and decide the best outcomes in every case.

  

Both sides engage in a considerable rhetoric, exaggeration, misrepresentation, distortion and perpetuation of myths. Little rational communication.

  

John Locke - "The government that governs least governs best"

  

Root cause is the oversized government.

  

The invisible hand does not always prevail.

  

State intervention is justified when private ownership doesn't exist or when private ownership would be dangerous.

  

Lassez faire - Let the people do as they please.

  

Individualism vs mercantalism

  

The dictatorship of the proletariate would be final. It would be result in a classless society - the final goal of the evolution. There is no place for religion and ethics. Religion has preached patience under hardship, and ethics subscribes to submission to lawful authority. Ethics are religion are the result of the productive system of the time and will disappear with capitalism.

  

Society and State

  

Society has been defined as a stable union of two or more people for a common purpose, to be achieved by common action. Human beings are not just rational animals; we are also social beings. We have a natural desire and need for one another. There are two socieities of prime importance - family and the state.

  

Strikes

     • Just cause to cease work. 

     • It must be the last resort and not the first

     • Advantages to be gained must outweigh the disadvantages.

     • It should not violate a valid contract

     • Every effort should be made to avoid violence

  

State

It is a social contract and an artificial construction. The purpose of the state is to serve the common good, the public welfare, peace and prosperity. It exists for the good of its citizens. States exist to help people do what they are unable to do for themselves. This is the principle of subsidiarity - that the state should never do for its citizens what the citizens can do for themselves. It should supplement and not supplant.

State exists for its citizens.

  

Civil servants and ministers are not the masters of ordinary citizens; rather they are their servants. Civil servants as "faceless people"

  

Greed for power is more dangerous than greed for wealth. Power over other people is insatiable.

  

Weberian model of bureaucracy

     • Fixed hierarchy

     • Technical rules

     • Secrecy and security

  

Public servants behave as uninterested and impersonal agents and have little consideration for the public good. Some use the rules of bureaucracy either not to do the job well or not to do it at all. 

  

Imagination and ingenuity is required.

  

Public servants are not robots. And to use the excuse of "I was just doing my job" is reminiscent of excuses made regarding Holocaust or during Vietnam war.

  

Whistleblowing is always risky, but acting on only a hunch may be unethical.

  

There is an ethical duty to obey legitimate laws, rules, regulations and orders but there is also a duty to disobey those that are not legal or ethical. 

  

Reflection, consultation and weighing of all factors are an important part of the ethical process.

  

Usurping authority and acting unethically.

  

The public or common good is more important than the private good.

  

Over the centuries countries with state religions have experienced great conflicts and wars over religion.

  

State is the protector of the human life.