---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# Prevention of Corruption Act (1988)

Wider definition, expedite the proceedings, enhanced penalties, fruitful provision for prevention of bribery.

  

Corruption = According to the World Bank it is the abuse of public office for private gain.

  

C = M + D - A 

Corruption = Monopoly + Discretion - Accountability.

  

Santhanam Committee Recommendation 1962.

  

**Bribe vs Gratification?**

- Abetment by Public Servants of Offences.
- Obtaining valuable thing without consideration - non bailable, non compoundable.
- Criminal misconduct: accepts or attempts to obtain gratification other than legal remuneration.
- Habitual committing of offence: taking gratification by corrupt means, personal influence.
- Punishment for attempt.

  

**Who can investigate?**

ACP, DSP

In Subramaniam Swamy vs CBI, SC said that CBI can investigate corruption charges against top bureaucrats without government nod.

  

**Other Laws to tackle corruption?**

- IPC, 1860
- Benami Transaction Act, 1988
- The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
- RTI, 2005.

  

**CVC**

- Set up in 1964 on the recommendation of Santhanam committee. 

  

Vineet Narain vs UoI (Jain Hawala Case): statutory status should be given to CVC.

  

**CVC Act 2003**

- Receive written complaints for any allegation or misuse of office and recommend appropriate action.
- CVC + 2 other members.

**Functions and Powers?**

- Exercise superintendence and give directions.
- Inquire, investigate and review.
- Tender advice to the Central Govt.
- It has the powers of a civil court.

**Jurisdiction?**

- AIS and Group A
- Scale V and above in PSB
- Grade D and above in RBI
- E-8 in PSU
- Managers in General Insurance Companies.

  

* * *

**Lokayukta** 

First set up by MH in 1971.