# Grammar

skulu-vaipu vellu : go towards school

  

Loki is into

ravi intloki velladu

  

gopi kitikiloninci custunnadu

  

  

  

**PAST TENSE**

  

verb + ae/im 

  

ra -> vacca 

tisukura -> tisukocca

  

caduvu -> cadiv

adugu -> adig

  

The -anu group shows different.

  

\-aa in normal. -a in neuter/ fem

  

anu - annadu

tinu - tinnadu

tisuko - tisukunnaavu

undu - unnaru

  

kurco - kurconnadi

vrithacheyyi - waste

vaccu - may

loninchi - through

vaipu - towards

  

gumigudu - gather

vinta - wonder

rakarakalu - different types

  

tayaruceyyi - prepare

loki - into

intakumundu - before this; previously

  

koor - curry

gurtuceyyi - remind

okcoT - at one place

cEru - to gather

oksari - at once

goDugu - umbrella

vEsukO - to put for one's self

  

gurinchi - about

charitra - history

anuko - think; plan

  

hayiga - happily

intavaraku - till this time, up to now

  

kooDadu - should not

  

**INFINITIVE**

  

infinitive forms have no independent usage.

verb + a 

  

**PAST NEGATIVE**

  

infinitve + ledu

  

nenu vellaledu

nuvvu poledu

  

The present negative is formed by adding ledu to the gerund form.

  

  

**PERMISSIVE FORM**

  

infinitive + vaccu

  

vellavaccu - one may go

miru kafi tagavaccu

  

Request for permission is formed by : Infinitive + vaccaa?

nenu lopaliki ravacca - may I come in ?

  

**NEGATIVE PERMISSIVE**

  

infinitive + kuDadu

  

ravi ti tagakuDadu

  

**NEGATIVE HORTATIVE**

\-vaddu is added to the infinitive form to form negative hortative.

manam vellavaddu - Let us not go

manam ravaddu - Let us not come

  

\-radu is added to the inifinitive form the persuasive form.

  

Persuasive = Infinitive + radu

  

This form is used to persuage the listener to do the action denoted by the verb.

  

i pustakam cadava-radu : why don't you read this book ?

  

**FUTURE NEGATIVE**

  

verb + a + personal suffix

  

  

**FUTURE TENSE**

  

Verb + ta / tum + Personal suffix

  

duku + ta + nu - dukutanu (I will jump)

vastadu - he will come

untaru - they will stay

  

**HORTATIVE**

\-dam is added

  

  

s + d = dd 

ces + dam = ceddam

  

Negative Hortative

  

Infinitive + vaddu

  

manam vellavaddu

manam ravaddu

  

Hortative + anivundi - I have a desire to ...

  

  

  

**PERSUASIVE**

  

Infinitive + raadu

  

i pustakam cadavaradu? why don't you read this book

  

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| nenu | ninnu |
| mem | mammalni |
| manam | manalni |
| nuvvu | ninnu |
| miru | mimmalni |
|     |     |

  

  

  

  

**PRESENT NEGATIVE**

  

Gerund + ledu

  

The present negative form do not maintain any agreement with person-gender-number. Hence no personal suffixes are required.

  

Sanskrit -am changes to -ani when accusative is form.

  

pustakam + dat or accusative = pustakani + ki

  

dani + ni = danni

  

  

  

**GERUND**

  

verb + aTam / aDam

verb + vaTam / aDam (-ra, -\[\]ra)

  

tinu -> tinaTam

  

  

**PRESENT TENSE**

verbal base + \[tunna, tom\] + personal suffix

  

tom occurs before fem and neuter.

  

taggu - reduce

purtiga - completely

bagucheyyi - set right

aaspitri - hospital

purticheyyi - finish

andu - available

tiTTu - scold

ErpaTu - arrangements

avatala - that side

ivatala - this side

aakulu - leaves

appudu - then

jarupu - move aside

kunDa - pot

guDDa - cloth

kappu - close

tippu - rotate

addam - mirror

daram - thread

karra - stick

chuTTu - wind

taDu - rope

gayyali - quarrelsome

vesham - role in a drama

  

konchemsepu - for a while

daka - till, untill, upto

dari - way

kobbarikayi - coconut

appaTi daka - till then

chadrangam - chess

kasepu - while

tirugu - stroll, wander

aagumu - stop

doruku - to be available

  

manam - manalni

mem - mammulni

nuvvu - ninnu

  

sEpu - time

  

anta - everywhere

veluturu - light

antE kadu - not only that

ento - so much

kanTE - than

cheDDa - bad

cuupinchu - show

eppuduu - always

vanTaillu - kitchen

vanTa - cooking

aaDu - to play

aTTa - a wrapper

veyyi - to draw

nErpu - to teach

  

  

andulO - in that

eduru - await

indulO - in this

endulO - in what

chappuDu - noise

kaTTa - bundle

cheti - oblique base of cheyyi

peTTukO - to put on; wear

inni - these many

ekkutunnanu - climbing

andulo - inside

khali - empty

panDu - fruit

ivvu - give

baitiki - outside

katti - knife

padunu - sharp

lOpal - inside

koTTu - tap, knock

indulo - inside this

inkok saari - once more

paat - old

koddu - knock

baiT - outside

tiyyi - open

cappuDu - rattling

neTTu - push

kaTTalu - bundle

kunTu - limp

paTTukO - hold

cEtilO - hands

eDma - left

kannu - eye

kuDi - right

vipritanga - blowing fast

dumma - dust

chilli - hole

dOva - way

muLLu - thorns

peddadO - how big

venaka - behind

ekkuva - more

takkuva - less

baruvu - heavy

konu - buy

selvu - holiday

tinu - eat

vinu - listen

aarogyam - health

konni - some (mass)

vaDDinchu - serve

anu - say

inTtanu - house owner

nidra-po - sleep

tagu - drink

nilco - stand

navvu - laugh

vinu - listen

undu - wait

kurco - sit

paTTuko - hold

peTTuko - wear

paDutunnanu - getting used to

  

iTlu is used to mark end of a letter

  

priyamaina - dear

kshemam - safe

jarugu - take place

kabaTTi - because

alvaTupadu - habituate

sangati - news

venTnE - immediately

bahusha - perhaps

pampu - send

kumarudu - son

kaLLajODu - spectacles

kani - but

chiikTi - dark

raavaDam - coming

pOvaDam - going

paaDu - singing

caduvu - study

targati - classroom

renDo - second

  

  

  

anu + tunnanu - antunnaru

tisuko + tunnaru - tisukuntunnaru

undu + tunnaru - untunnaru

  

double adjective intensifies its meaning

  

tinu + ara - tinara (inferior, imperative).

  

  

adi andulo danilo

idi indulo dinilo

edi endulo denilo

  

kannu kanti kallu

ceyyi ceti cetulu

  

  

  

  

  

  

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| vel | vel-tunna-du |
| ra  | vas-tunna-du |
| tisukura | tisukos-tom-di |
| koyyi | kos- |
| cheyyi | ces- |
| raayi | ras- |
| cudu | cus- |
| tiyyi | tis- |
| neTTu | neD- |
| peTTu | peDu- |
|     | kuntu- |
| getting | paDu- |
| burn | kalu- |
|     | nidrapo- |
|     | tagu- |
| nilcho | nilcun- |
| laugh | navvu- |
| anu (say) |     |
| ceppu | cep/ceb |

  

midi-ninci -> from upper part

kindi-ninci -> from lower part

daggari-ninci -> from near the tree

  

edO - something

ekkadO - somewhere

eppudO - sometimes

endukO - for some reason

  

  

  

Monkey - koti

komma - branch

maade - ours only

paDavuDi - uproar, hurry

banDi - cart

ekku - climb

duku - jump

kurraDu - lad

\-kosam - for

kashtavdu - work hard

evarO - somebody

kayalu - fruits

maamidi pandu - mangoes

koyyi - pluck

jagratta - be careful

mellaga - slowly

uupu - rock, shake

raalu - fall

anni - all

Eru - pick

digu - climb down

kindiki ra - come down

virugu - break

niilagE - like you

eTu - which side

vastunnaru - coming

aTa - in that direction

parigettu - run

dong - thief

\-laga - like

paaripo - running away

iTu - this direction

paTTukO - catch him

janam - people

mimmalni - you (acc) of miru

  

  

\-vali occurs with long vowel and -aali occurs with short vowel.

ra - raavali

tinu - tinali

  

**Accusative Case**

\-ni/nu. Direct object

nenu ravini cudali

  

Added to the animate nouns. 

  

Indirect object takes dative. Direct object accusative

Raviki ni peru cheppu.

  

nenu - nannu

  

\-tO is used as sociative

  

pada is a defective verb.

  

paravaledu - doesn't matter, don't worry

viluledu - not possible.

  

separable we use daggar.

hari daggar pustakam undi

  

inseparable we use dative clause

hariki pillalu unnaru

  

  

  

daggari is the oblique base of daggar. If the noun is not a destination then we use daggariki.

Ramu daggariki vellu

  

ayite emiti - then what?

  

tiisukupO - take away

kaniisam - atleast

anavasaram - not necessary

pada - come on, let's go

vErE - other

sahayam - help

Ok panicheyyi - do one thing

uurkO - quiet

nannu - to me

chalaa - sufficient?

aDagu - ask

maLLi - again

kaDugu - wash

bagaledu - not good, clean

kancam - plate

viilu - possibility; convenience

ada vishayam - is that the matter?

Dabbulu - money

cheyyi - do

maaTlaDu - speak

naato - with me

po - go

guDi - temple

baDi - school

padimandi - people

cuTTuu - around

roojuu - daily

tiirik - leisure

pani - work

maaT - word

vEDuk - merriment

pantulu - teacher

bOdhan - teaching

bhaavi - future

niccen - ladder

aaT - play

baaT - path

manovikasham - mental enlightenment

medDu - mind

oDlu - body

muddu - pretty

toTa - garden

bommu - idol

nevedyam - offering

aikmatyam - unity

tiirik kaalkshemam - while away time

adde - rent

anduke - that's why

tinu - eat

Aakali - hunger

tiyyi - take away, reduce

giitgiyyi - underline

peTTu - put

tondarga - quickly

koyyi - pluck

poyyi - put

mokkalu - plants

bayalderandi - let's go out

tondar - hurry

bayalderu - go out

maamayya - maternal uncle

raayi - write

sorugu - drawer of a table or box

viithi - street

pET - suburb or division of a big town

giita - line

giyyi - draw

mokka - plant

jEbu - pocket

  

  

  

\-gaani is added to all nouns to denote choice.

  

akkarledu is negative of kaavali in terms of needing. vaddu in terms of wanting.

  

chaalu is another defective verb. chaladu (is not sufficient), chalavu (are not sufficient).

  

ninchi (spoken) / nunchi, nundi (written) denotes from. Takes oblique base.

  

The subject of a defective verb is in dative case.

naku paalu kavaali

  

The lengthening of the final vowel of an interrogative word and the use of a negative word along with it denote something that we can equate with nothing, nobody, nowhere.

  

akkada emI ledu - there is nothing there

akkada evaruu leru - nobody is there

  

adi emiti ? emi ledu (nothing)

  

adi veDi kafi

adi kafi veDiga undi

  

callani / callaga

  

nillu/paalu are plural.

  

chalvu - not sufficient

  

prayaaNam - journey

  

pagaLLa - days

  

veyyi - thousand

daadaapu - approximately

sumaaru - roughly

vandal - hundred

  

nuuT - hundred and ...

vand - hundred

chaalu - sufficient

gaani - or

inta - this much

\-Em - why

anta - that much

Enta - how much

baagaane - all right 

goodaa - also

chaaladu - not sufficient

  

  

  

chEdugaa - bitter

tiyyagaa - sweet

chappaga - insipid

kashaayama

  

panchdaar - sugar

lEda - don't 

  

alvaaTu - habit

tiipi - sweets

  

anta - that much

akkarledu - don't need

sagar - half of it

  

  

  

nooT - one hundred

  

ikkNNinchi - from here

  

  

\-o is added to make dubitative particle.

  

adi ekkada undO - it is uncertain where it is

atanu evarO - it is not known who he is

  

adi akkada undemO - it may be there

  

emo is added to declarative sentence to express a condition of not knowing or uncertainty.

  

Emo is given as a reply for showing uncertainty.

  

**kadu vs ledu**

kadu is used to negate verbless sentence and as a response to verbless interrogative question. Can be used to negate a particular word in a sentence.

  

idi pustak unda ? kadu

  

ikka ravi kalam undi - ikkada kadu, akkada undi

  

ledu is used to negate the verb and existential verb undi

pustakam ikkada undi - pustakam ikkada ledu

  

\-kandi always means don't

  

vetuku + aku - vetakaku

caduvu + aku - cadavaku

  

\-di + -lo -> -LLo

  

gadilO + a - gadilona

  

  

**Dative Case**

ku/ki is used to convert oblique cases into dative case. 

i ending bases take ki (except mi and ni). 

others take ku

  

Denotes recipient, benefactive (one who gets or receives something)

- ilaku i pustakam ivvu

  

Possession (something/somebody has something)

- ataniki chaduvu undi
- ma intiki phone undi
- ma uriki rail undi
- hariki jvaram
- cheTTuku pulu unnayi

  

Used when age is expressed

  

When for meaning is implied

mandu evariki (medicine is for whom?)

  

Location of time

natakam enni gantalku

  

Noun denoting destination or goal takes dative case suffix

skulku vellu

  

Feeling, habits

ataniki kafi alavatu - coffee is a habit for him

  

Purposive

Naku paalu tisukura

  

Oblique base of uru is uri

Oblique base of ikkada, akkada, ekkadi are ikkadi, akkadi, ekkadi.

  

emamma - fem, non-hon

emayya - masc, non-hon

emandi - epicene formal

  

amma to female, ayya to male and andi to both respectful.

  

\-na is a locative case marker with nouns such as pakka, roju, tarika 

aa rojuna

aro tarikuna

  

Baga - good and Chala - very

  

Ela - how

  

mundu - first

manchinillu - water

kaavaali - need

tarvata - afterwards

challaga - cold

emundi - what

  

viiTilO - among these

  

veDi - hot (adj)

veDiga - hot (adverb)

  

vaddu / oddu - not required

  

paalu - milk

  

challani - cool

  

  

  

marathidi - marathi woman

teluguvadu - telugu boy

  

manchi-dani - good woman

manchi-vadi - good boy

  

vaDu - vaDi (predicate)

okaNNi - The only one

  

emem unnayi - what all are there

  

idi ravi kalam - idi kalam ravidi (possessive)

idi manchi kalam - idi kalam manchidi (qualitative)

idi pedda gadi - idi gadi peddadi (quantitative)

idi japan kalam - idi kalam japandi (belonging to / made in)

idi renDO kalam - idi kalam reDOdi (ordinal numeral)

  

inka is now.

  

ninna - yesterday

sayantram - evening

guDi - temple

guLLO - in temple

guLLu - temples

enni ganTalku - at what time

miranduru - all of you

  

abadDham - lie

  

mari - then

  

vetuku - search

baagaa vetkandi - search thoroughly

  

jarugu - move

pakkaku - side

  

tarikun - on that day

  

poDupu katha - riddle

andaram - all of us

madhyahnam - afternoon

Emo - it is not known

vastuvu - a thing, article

konchem - little

pakka - side

jarugu - to move a side

  

kalu - leg

kadlik - movement

kolat - measurement

ruupam - shape

  

enDa - sun

vEDi - heat

gaali - wind

  

shakti - power

kaalam - time

  

veLLu - go

  

  

  

  

  

vadu, di, varu, vallu are used as human predicate marker.

  

  

  

o is used as ordinal marker

  

TTu + lu - Tlu

  

ennO - ordinal count interrogative

adi ennO gadi?

adi aaru gadi

  

ent - how much

  

All pronouns except em are used as predicates

  

  

  

EDi - where he (non-hon)

Eri - where he/she (hon), they

  

sarE - OK !

  

  

When used as Predicate we use - di and -vi

Ravidi

Evaridi

Evarivi

  

ArugO - there they are!

  

  

kada - isn't it?

  

  

ela unnaru - how are you?

  

emphasis marker (E) + question marker (a) - Ena

  

vallu rachayitala -  vallu rachayitalEna (are they writers)

kurchii + aa - kurchina

kurchii + E - kurchine

ade + a - adena

  

aame + aa - aamae (is she)

  

\-aku is added to make it non-hon negative and -akanDi to make it honorific

  

if the subject has inclusive marker, the predicate will also have inclusive marker.

  

renDuu - both of them

  

Aa is used as Yes.

  

\-amma is used for non-honorific address marker to young female. It also triggers the same sandhi process that -andi does (introduction of n)

  

Oblique form of illu is inti and plural is iLLu.

  

When -lu is added to -lu it becomes -LLu

  

Nouns and pronouns in telugu have two forms: Nominative and Oblique. Oblique base is used when noun takes suffixes of other cases.

  

Daggar, Pakkana take oblique bases of noun.

  

  

\-amma feminine affectionate address marker

  

  

  

bagu - well

miranduru - all of you

  

  

adugO - there it is

idugO - here it is

ivigO - here they are

avigO - there they are

  

Long vowel (except verbs) + undi - nandi

idugO + andi - idugOnanadi

  

long monosyllabic vowel + andi - long vowel optionally become short

rA + andi - randi

  

ila and ala are used as locative sense.

ila ra - come here

  

ila - this way

adi/idi  is also used for female inferior. 

  

  

  

**Forming Plurals**

_\-lu_ is added to make plurals.

  

Sanskrit words with -_am_ changes to -aa.

pustakam -> pustakalu

kalam -> kalalu

  

i ending noun changes i to u 

yi ending nouns are exceptions

  

gadi - gadulu

pilli - pillulu

  

extended length of the final syllable works as the inclusive marker. 

nEnuu lEnu - I am also not there

  

when used with more than one it denotes the function of and. Here all of them must have extended vowels in

the last.

  

i fotolu ammA nannagaruu unnayi

  

masculine noun ending in -du which are borrowed from Sanskrit drop their final -du before the plural suffix -lu

  

snehitudu + lu - snehitulu

  

Adjectives in Telugu don't show number/gender distinction.

  

dakTaru + ni - daktarni

dakTaru + lu - dakTarlu

  

Du + ni - nni 

  

Mi - your plural

Ni - your singular

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
| i   | aa  | e   |
| ila | ala | ela |

  

ok is the numeral adjective of okati.

  

Kadu is used for not

  

Emandi (masc & fem) honorific address term. 

Emayya (masc) non-honorific address term.

  

\-andi is added to pay respect to the listener.

  

Emphatic marker -ei used.

  

\-i is added to \[lu, du, ru\] to form oblique base.

manavaralu - manavarali

ravigaru - ravigari

snehituDu - snehituDi

  

Telugu na / ni are not used alongwith kinship terms such as tat.

  

The combination of i + a is pronounced as -ae (cat, mat, hat)

  

gadi + a - gadae

pilli + a - pillae

  

  

  

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
| nEnu | unnanu | lEnu |
| mEm, manam | unnAm | lEm |
| nuvvu | unnavu | lEvu |
| miru, aayan, aame, vaaru, vallu | unnaru | lEru |
| vAdu, atanu | unnAdu | lEdu |
| adi, Ame, | undi | lEdu |
| avi | unnayi | lEvu |