# Untitled Note

[https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-great-short-stories-with-a-twist-ending](https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-great-short-stories-with-a-twist-ending)

A man walks into a restaurant with a full-grown ostrich bird behind him. The waitress asks them for their orders. The man says, 'A hamburger, fries and a coke,' and turns to the ostrich, 'What's yours?'   
  
'I'll have the same,' says the ostrich.   
  
A short time later the waitress returns with the order 'That will be $9.40 please,' and the man reaches into his pocket and pulls out the exact change for payment.   
  
The next day, the man and the ostrich come again and the man says, 'A hamburger, fries and a coke'   
The ostrich says, 'I'll have the same'   
Again the man reaches into his pocket and pays with exact change.   
  
This becomes routine until the two enter again.   
  
'The usual?' asks the waitress.   
'No, this is Friday night, so I will have a steak, baked potato and a salad,' says the man.   
'Same,' says the ostrich.   
Shortly the waitress brings the order and says, 'That will be $32.62.'   
Once again the man pulls the exact change out of his pocket and places it on the table.   
  
The waitress cannot hold back her curiosity any longer.   
"Excuse me, sir. How do you manage to always come up with the exact change in your pocket every time?"   
  
Says the man, "Well, several years ago I was cleaning the attic and found an old lamp. When I rubbed it, a Genie appeared and offered me two wishes. The first wish I asked was that if I ever had to pay for anything, I would just put my hand in my pocket and the right amount of money would always be there."  
  
The waitress said "That's brilliant! Most people would ask for a million dollars or something, but you'll always be as rich as you want for as long as you live. How smart of you!''  
  
"That's right. Whether it's a gallon of milk or a Rolls Royce, the exact amount of money is always there" says the man proudly.  
  
The waitress asks, "But, what's that ostrich all about?"  
  
The man sighs, pauses and answers with a heavy heart, "My second wish was for a tall chick with long legs who accompanies me wherever I go and agrees with everything I say".  
  

MORAL OF THE STORY: Men's brains work brilliant until they start thinking about a woman!!