---
categories:
- Inbox
---
# CrPC

Report made by Police Officer which discloses commission of a non-cognizable offence is deemed to be complaint. It is covered under **173(2)**

**Victim**

Means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of act or omission for which the accused person is charged and the expression victim includes his or her guardian or legal heir.

  

**Trial of offences under IPC and other laws (4)**

  

**What are the classes of criminal courts (6)?**

- Court of session, JM 1st class, JM 2nd class, EM

  

**Metropolitan Area (8)**

Population of more than 1 million

  

**Court of Session (9)**

  

**CJM (12)**

He is a JM of 1st class.

  

**Subordination of CJM (15)**

**Executive Magistrate (20)**

  

**Subordination of EM (23)**

All EM except ADM are subordinate to DM.

  

**Public Prosecutor** **(24).**

- For PP or APP (7 years)
- For SPP (10 years)

  

A police officer can be appointed as APP **(25)** if he is not below the rank of **Inspector** and has not taken part in the investigation of the offence with respect to which accused is being prosecuted.

  

**Directorate of Prosecution (25 A)**

Not less than **10 years**. Concurrence with CJ of HC. Under admin control of Home Dept. All PP, APP under Directorate.

  

  

* * *

**Juvenile (27)**

- Case to be tried by CJM or court mentioned under Children Act. For offences not punishable with death or life.
- Under the age of 16 years.

  

**Quantum of sentence by HC and Session Judge (28)**

- HC - any sentence
- Session Judge / Additional Session Judge - Death to be confirmed by HC
- Assistant - Except death, life, more than 10 years.

  

**Quantum of sentence by Magistrates (29)**

- CJM - except death, life, more than 7 years.
- 1st Class - Not exceeding 3 years, fine of 10 K
- 2nd Class - Not exceeding 1 year, 5 K

  

**Sentence in default of fine (30)**

Not to exceed One Fourth of maximum sentence.

  

Court can order consecutive sentences. Will not exceed 14 years or twice the amount for single sentence.

  

**Duties of Public**

- 37 **\-** To assist Magistrate and Police
    - Preventing escape of person
    - Prevention of breach of peace
    - Injury to public property
- 39 **\-** Give information of certain offences
- 40 **\-**  Duties of officers employed with affairs of village
    - Residence of notorious receiver of stolen property
    - Thug, robber
    - Intention to commit non bailable offence
    - Suspicious death
    - Maintenance of order and prevention of crime

  

* * *

**Arrest of Persons**

- Arrest without warrant (41)
    - Cognizable offence
    - Reasonable complaint, credible information, suspicion
        - Prevent further offence
        - Proper investigation
        - Tampering of evidence
        - Inducement, threat or promise
    - Proclaimed as offender
    - Stolen property
    - Obstructs police officer in execution of duty
    - Attested by one witness and countersigned by person arrested
- Non cognizable offence and refusal to give name and residence (42).
- Arrest by private person (43)
- Arrest by magistrate (44) - any offence
- No women shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise (46)
- Search of place (47)
- Search of arrested person (51)
- Seize offensive weapons (52)
- Not to be detained more than 24 hours (57)

  

  

* * *

  

Warrant may be directed to any person (73)

  

Take security and release from custody (71)

  

Outside district - if within 30 KM then same court else other court.

  

  

* * *

**Proclamation for absconding and attachment**

- Issue proclamation (82)
- Order attachment (83) : movable and immovable
- Movable by seizure, receiver, prohibiting delivery of such property
- Immovable by possession, receiver, prohibiting payment of rent on delivery of property
- Claim and objection to attachment within 6 months

  

**Power to take bond for appearance (88) and arrest on breach of bond (89)**

  

* * *

**SEARCH WARRANTS**

- Issued u/s 93
- Stolen Property, forged documents (94)
    - DM, SDM, 1st Class can authorise above rank of constable.
        - Enter, search, take possesion
    - Objectionable item
        - Counterfeit coin
        - Metal
        - Currency note, stamps
        - Forged documents
        - False seals
        - Obscene objects under 292 of IPC
        - Materials used for production

- Wrongfully confined (97) : DM, SDM, 1st Class to any person 
- Restoration of abducted female (98) : Female under the age of 18 years. Complaint made on oath. DM, SDM, 1st class order for immediate restoration of such female child
- Person to allow search (100) : 2 witnesses, occupant to attend search, make list of seized items.
- Police can seize stolen objects, or suspicion of offence (102)
- Magistrate can order search in his presence (103)

  

  

* * *

**SECURITY FOR KEEPING PEACE & GOOD BEHAVIOUR**

  

- Court of session or 1st class for 3 years with or without sureties (106)
- Security for keeping peace. Information that person is likely to commit breach of peace or disturb tranquility. With or without sureties for 1 year (107)
- Seditious matter (108). With or without sureties. 1 year
- Suspected person (109). With or without sureties. 1 year
- Habitual Offender (110). With sureties. 3 years.

  

Order under 111. Substance of information, amount of bond to be executed, the term for which it will be in force, character and class of sureties.

  

Summons or warrant in case of person not so present (113)

  

Power to dispense with personal appearance (115)

  

Inquiry (116) 

- Bond if immediate breach of peace
- Enquiry to be completed in 6 months.
- Session judge can vacate if time limit exceeds

  

Order to give security (117)

  

Discharge of person (118)

  

Commencement of security after expiration of such sentence (119)

  

Power to reject sureties (121)

  

Imprisonment in default of security (122)

  

DM can order release of person (123)

  

  

* * *

Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents (125)