# 22 January

Visited Kandla Special Economic Zone. We were first shown presentation followed by a short video on SEZ. The Development Commissioner briefed us and answered our questions.

India's first SEZ in 1965 and one of the largest in India. Even the Chinese came to study our SEZ and replicated our model. It was first in India Pacific.

There are 20 operational SEZ in Gujarat and 35 notified SEZ. Gujarat alone contributes one third of total export done by SEZ

There are many challenges:

- Imposition of MAT.
- Imposition of Dividend Distribution Tax.
- Size of SEZ in India is quite small compared to the mammoth SEZs in China

DC told us that few months ago he had visited SEZ in Dubai and Turkey and he found that the firms operating there get huge benefits and in Turkey even the income tax of workers is exempted if more than 90% of manufactured products are exported.

  

In India however, the situation is quite different. According to CAG report of 2012 on SEZ more than 60% of SEZ are not doing what they are supposed to do and it has become a real state business.

  

Kandla SEZ hosted a lunch for us.

  

Then we visited Hindustan Unilever Limited and saw the production of Dove, Vaseline etc.

  

Then to a an amazing unit that left us really surprised. It imports discarded cloths from US and just sorts them on the basis of type, quality, size and reexports them to low income countries and makes huge profits !

  

Then to IFFCO which is the largest fertilizer firm in India. The fertilizer industry in India is reeling under huge debt burden as subsidy has not been given to companies yet. The prices of urea in India is lowest in the world. We visited an area where urea was being imported and also saw huge tanks storing ammonia etc.

  

In the night Kandla SEZ threw us a dinner at Radisson.