# My Interview

UPSC Rank : **58**

Attempt No : 1st

  

Board: H.C. Gupta

Date: 9 June 2015

Time: 4:30 pm

  

Academic Background: B.Tech, Electrical IIT Delhi (2013)

Job Experience: RBI, Samsung, Estee Advisors

Hobbies: Learning language, chess, teaching.

  

Presently Working : Yes.

  

\-------------------------------------------------------- (Chairperson) ---------------------------------------------------------

  

CP: So are you working ?

  

Me: Yes sir. 

  

CP : Where and what are you doing?

  

Me: Sir, I am working as a technical analyst at Estee Advisors Private Limited, Gurgaon

  

CP: What's your role.

  

Me: Sir, I write softwares for High Frequency Trading platform.

  

CP: In which stock exchanges does your company trade?

  

Me: NSE, BSE, MCX, CME, SGCX, DGCX

  

CP: Recently the govt has launched a scheme related to gold. Do you know about it?

  

Me: Yes sir. It is called Gold Monetisation Scheme .... details followed.

  

CP: I think it's a completely useless scheme. People are emotionally attached to their jewellery and therefore they would never put their jewellery in bank. 

  

Me: Sir we can offer higher interest rate and moreover all our gold is not in the form of jewellery.

  

CP: (not convinced by my answer). It's the bureaucrat like you that give such nonsense suggestions. Tell me some measures to improve the scheme.

  

Me: (.. gave some measures).

  

CP: (again not convinced). The steps suggested by you have been tried earlier in many different forms. If they did not work in past then how will it work in future?

  

Me: Sir, it's better to have hope than be pessimistic.

  

CP: Do you think having hope will run the country ? 

  

\------------------------------------------ (Member - 1) -----------------------------------------------

  

M1: So Bhavesh, tell me what's a blue water navy?

  

Me: I told him the definition etc.

  

M1: What is India doing in this regard ?

  

Me: Told him about our PMs visit, navy rescue efforts, joint exercise, upgradation etc.

  

M1: He asked me about some warfare ships imported from Russia.

  

Me: Sorry sir, I don't recall the name

  

M1: Your hobby is language learning. What languages do you know?

  

Me: Sir, I like learning scripts and I can read and write in all major Indian languages.

  

_All of them looked stunned for a moment !_

M1: Can you write your name in **Tamil** .

  

Me: I wrote my name in Tamil.

  

M1: So your name is Bhavesh and not Bhaavesh.

  

Me: Yes sir !

  

_M1 was very pleased with my effort._

Lady Member (from Bengal): Write your name in **Bengali**

  

Me: I wrote my name in Bengali

  

Lady Member: Great, this guy can be posted to any corner of the country.

  

M1: Why are you learning these languages.

  

Me: Told him about my project to digitise all Indian texts from ancient to medieval era in a searchable format.

  

\---------------------------------------------------------------- (M2 : Lady Member) ---------------------------------------------------------------------

  

M2: So you have worked in RBI

  

Me: Yes ma'am.

  

M2: Do you think RBI role is as important today as it was 20 years.

  

Me: Gave some standard text book answers.

  

M2: Why 21st century is called Asian Century.

  

Me: A standard reply follows ...

  

M2: Give some reasons why Bollywood will supercede Hollywood in 21st century.

  

Me: Large diaspora, diversity, music, huge population etc ...

  

M2: Which was the last book you studied?

  

Me: Surely You're Joking Feynman - Richard Feynman

  

M2: What's it about?

  

Me: Told her about the life of great physicist etc....

  

\------------------------------------------------------ (Member - 3) ------------------------------------------------------------------

  

M3: Why are agricultural policy is flawed?

  

Me: Gave a very long reply - compromising on long term gains vs short term benefits etc. .... 

  

M3: Did India liberalise too early?

  

Me: Again a long answer followed. I gave ample data both in favour and in against ...

  

_seemed very satisfied with my answer._

_\-----------------------------------------------_ (Member - 4) --------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

M4: Tell me something about John Nash. Which disease was he suffering from?

  

Me: Narrated his life history in detail .............

  

M4: Who gave the concept of Game Theory first?

  

Me: Sorry sir, I don't recall the name.

  

M4: How many Nobel prizes have been awarded in the field of game theory.

  

Me: I told him 6 but 11 was the answer.

  

M4: Why IITians don't join DRDO?

  

Me: Gave a good long reply ............. 

  

M4: I will have to talk to DRDO !!

  

\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Chairperson: Bhavesh, your interview is over.