---
categories:
- JSK / Election
---
# Election Meeting 23-06-2023

## TODO

- Data on Slide 2 needs to be changed
- Data on Slide 30 needs to be changed

  

- [x] Reporting format for 6,7,8 for AEROs to be made.
- [x] Check the slide number 20
- [ ] Critical & Vulnerable Polling Stations
- [ ] Number of EPIC Card totally ordered for printing. How much delay in distribution of EPIC ?
- [ ] Flying Squad Data needs to be checked.
- [ ] Verification of all **80+ voters** in the Electoral Roll
- [ ] PSE Data to be verified and justification given
- [ ] Why high Form - 6 deletions ?
- [ ] Separate Slide for Electoral Offences and action taken last year.
- [ ] Number of the Assembly Constituency should be mentioned properly
- [ ] When was the last indent for EPIC given ? There should be a monthly, fortnightly system.
- [ ] How many EPIC due ?
- [x] Check EP Ratio again
- [ ] How many PSE deletion. It should not be half
- [ ] Read FLC guidelines.
- [ ] How many **mock poll done ?**
- [ ] Landline number of BSNL ?
- [ ] Send a page of BLO Register being identified (House 2 House Verification)
- [ ] PWD Manned Polling Station number should be made to 1
- [ ] Form 9, 10, 11 generated through ERONET for political parties
- [ ] Awareness activity of EVM cannot take place after the election is announced. It has to be done after the FLC is over.
- [ ] Age cohort percentage has to be entered.
- [ ] Training for filling forms of all BLOs and BLO Supervisor

  

- Original **Civil Registrar** in India. 
- First 8 slides - Electoral Roll
- 2% addition should be done per year for the population in a district.

  

## Important

- EP Ratio Census - Number of 18+ years in 1000 persons

## Timeline

- 13th July - ERO NET will be frozen
- 2nd August - Draft rolls will be published.’

  

## Queries ?

- If someone has been wrongly included as PwD then how do you remove the person from PwD
- EP Ratio - Census / Roll
- Will the entry of the voter would change automatically in case of Form - 8 (shifting from one constituency to another constituency)

  

## PwD Voters

- 40%+ disability

- Facilitation at the polling station. 
- Visually impaired - Companion
- **Saksham App** \- need to popularize in the district.
- Home voting can be provided. **Form 12-D** to be distributed amongst all the voters (PwD + 80+ age)
- It’s not target oriented. It’s an optional feature. Rarest of the rarest case this option is available
- **Flagging of ER Database.**
- While applying for Form 12-D, it is mandatory to submit the disability form.
- Suo Moto is not be marked in ER. If he or she is already enrolled as Elector then it has to be done through Form-8

  

## Deletions

- More than 2% the ERO has to verify personally

  

## Electoral Roll - Main Points

1. Inclusivity - Dedicated AERO for educational institutions.
2. Health & Quality of electoral roll. Any duplicate voter should not be there in Part Electoral roll. Every BLO has to be told.
3. Name of dead person should not be there in the electoral roll
4. Marking of **PwD.** 
5. Tribal population should be 100% included.
6. Prepared with transparency
7. **Registers - Signatures of political parties. Minutes of the meeting important.**

  

## Political Parties

- Are they invited ?
- Minutes
- Indexing of minutes of the meetings

  

## Migration

- Name of the person should be deleted from where the person has migrated.

  

## Photo Similar Entries

- Whether Form-7 of all PSEs have been filled or not.
- Wherever the person is ordinary resident the person will be retained.

  

## EPIC Card

- Distribution of all Form 6 & 8 done ?
- What is the name of the agency ?
- Understand the entire supply chain. How does the delivery take place ?

  

## BLAs

- Get the list from Political Parties

  

## Electoral Roll

- How many **super checks** to be done by DEOs ?
- 100% STs should be enrolled in the voter list.

  

## BLOs

- Category of BLOs
- All have to be government servants
- **13**  categories

  

## Draft Roll

- No form should be pending on the day of publication of the draft roll.

  

## House 2 House

- Notional House Number
- The notional house number should be entered in consultation with the voter as the voter address would be reflected in the EPIC also.

  

* * *

## Polling Stations

- Physical verification of all PS to take place.
- Check whether the phone signal is working or not in these areas.

  

## ARO

- It has to be notified in the State Gazette.

  

## FLC 

- Training & Awareness EVMs should be taken out
- Only FLC OK machines used to be for training & awareness.
- Only use dummy symbols provided by the commission
- List of FLC OK machines to be sent to all political parties and receipt of the same to be kept at Collectorate.

  

## Demonstration

- Demonstration of EVM - big placard to be placed.
- Mobile VAN to be used for this.

  

## NGSP

- Distribution of different complants.

  

## Trainings

  

- All **updated handbooks** should be used only.
- How many doing for the 1st time, 2nd time etc.
- Take stock of trainers available in the District. Whether they are sufficient in the district or not ?
- Are they themselves properly trained or not ?
- Checklists 
- Do’s and Don’ts

  

## Flying Squads

- 3 per constituency

  

* * *

## Critical & Vulnerable Polling Stations

- Critical is bigger set. 
- All vulnerable PS would be automatically categorized as Critical PS
- Vulnerability of the voter
    - Who are vulnerable ?
    - Who is creating this vulnerability ?
- This exercise starts **6 months** before the election.
- **4 months** prior - Sectoral Officer & Sector Police Officers to conduct field visits and assess the vulnerability.
- CAPF measures, Non CAPF measures.
- There are **21 parameters.**
- 7 Criterias
    - All vulnerable PS
    - 90% voting and 75% voting for one candidate.
    - Abnormal law & order situation.
- Towards the poll this vulnerability should decrease.
- The media should not be given information regarding Vulnerable PS
- CAPF can be used for SST, FST also

  

## SSR - 2023

- No advance application to be accepted.

  

## Part Constituency

### Duties of District Collector

- Polling parties
- Counting issues
- Who will provide AMF

  

## Form - 8

- Category of Form - 8 : what kind of corrections have been requested.

  

## Webcasting, CCTV instructions

- DEO Office - Monitoring Cell 
- The link should not be given on Youtube or to media. It should only be given to CEO Office & ECI

  

## Postal Ballot

- Service Voters (Oldest Form) - ETPBS
- Voters on Election Duty. Training sessions are used to provide them the Postal Ballot. Facilitation centre to encourage them to vote at the PS
- **Absentee Voters**
    - PWD
    - 80+
    - Voters on Essential Services (Electricity, Telephone Company)
    - COVID (not relevant now)

  

## Form - 6

- Before: Fresh and address change
- Now: Only for fresh enrolment. 18-19 should be captured. More than 21, the person would have been enrolled somewhere else.
- Unusual number of Form-6 should be seen as a concern.

  

## Form - 8

- Shifting of address. Form-8 will be filled.

  

## Form - 7

- No suo moto deletion will be done this year.
- For death case, death certificate + BLO report will be there.
- If there is no death certificate, if the ERO is certified basing on BLO report, the name of the person can be deleted.
- If the address is not found then the ERO can take decision on the Form - 7

  

## 24.06.2023 Notes

- House to House Verification has to be done. 
- 18-19 coverage is very low in all the districts. It should be 3% atleast.
- No duplicate voters should exist in the Electoral Roll
- Wrongful deletion needs to be avoided.
- No suo moto deletion - It has to done through Form-7 
- Auto generation of Form - 7 needs to be done.
- Abnormal increase / decrease in the voters at a polling station - more than 2% inclusion or deletion
- 2 Certificates - No duplicates in the part. Each DEO has to give certificate.
- No name of the dead person in the Polling Station.
- EP Ratio should be around 70%. Problem of not using right projection of the population.
- **Trainings missing in many districts.**
- **EPIC distribution has to be done properly.**
- **Meet with political parties at all levels. Properly record the minutes of the meetings.**

> Is there any polling stations in rented Anganwadi buildings in Jayashankar Bhupalpally District ?  

  

## List of important manuals related to Election

- Registration of Electoral Rolls, 1960
- Conduct of Election Rules, 1961
- RPA 1950
- RPA 1951
- EVM Manual, 7th Edition is available
- Status paper on EVM
- Legal History of EVM
- General PPT on EVM
- Electoral Roll Manual 
- Manual on Polling Stations